The 1992 Summer Olympics, officially known as the Games of the XXV Olympiad, and officially branded as Barcelona '92, were an international multi-sport event held in Barcelona, Spain, from 25 July to 9 August 1992. A total of 9,356 athletes representing 169 National Olympic Committees (NOCs) participated. The games featured 257 events in 25 sports and 34 disciplines. Badminton, baseball, and women's judo were included as official medal events for the first time.
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, athletes from twelve of the fifteen former Soviet republics competed together as part of the Unified Team. Two other Soviet republics, Estonia and Latvia, competed independently for the first time since 1936, while Lithuania did so for the first time since 1928. South Africa, which had been excluded from the Olympics for its use of the apartheid system in sports, returned to the games for the first time since 1960.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Slovenia competed independently, as opposed to as a part of Yugoslavia, for the first time following the breakup of Yugoslavia. Due to conduct in the ongoing Yugoslav Wars, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was placed under sanctions by United Nations Security Council Resolution 757, which prevented the country from taking part in the Olympics. Individual Yugoslav athletes were allowed to take part as independent participants and, with Macedonian athletes who could not appear under their own flag because their NOC had not yet been formed, combined to form the Independent Olympic Participants team. East and West Germany also competed together for the first time since 1964, following the German reunification.
Athletes representing 64 NOCs received at least one medal, with 37 NOCs winning at least one gold medal. The Unified Team won the most gold medals, with 45, and the most overall medals, with 112. Algeria, Indonesia, and Lithuania won their nations' first Summer Olympic gold medals. It was also the first Olympic medal of any kind for Lithuania. Croatia, Israel, Malaysia, Namibia, Qatar, and Slovenia won their nation's first Olympic medals. Unified Team gymnast Vitaly Scherbo won the most gold and overall medals among individual participants, with six (all gold).


== Medal table ==

The medal table is based on information provided by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and is consistent with IOC conventional sorting in its published medal tables. The table uses the Olympic medal table sorting method. By default, the table is ordered by the number of gold medals the athletes from a nation have won, where a nation is an entity represented by a NOC. The number of silver medals is taken into consideration next and then the number of bronze medals. If teams are still tied, equal ranking is given and they are listed alphabetically by their IOC country code.
In gymnastics events, there were eight ties for medals. Two gold medals and no silver medals were awarded due to first-place ties in the men's pommel horse and women's vault events. Two silver medals and no bronze medals were awarded due to second-place ties in the men's floor, men's horizontal bar, and women's balance beam events. Three bronze medals were awarded due to third-place ties in the men's parallel bars and women's floor events, while two bronze medals were awarded in the men's rings event.
In women's solo synchronized swimming there was also a two-way tie for first, which resulted in two gold medals and no silver medals being awarded.
Events in boxing and tennis resulted in bronze medals being awarded to each of the competitors who lost their semi-final matches, as opposed to them taking part in a third place tiebreaker. Events in judo used a repechage system which also resulted in two bronze medals being awarded.

Key
 ‡  Changes in medal standings (see below)

  *   Host nation (Spain)


== Changes in medal standings ==


== See also ==

All-time Olympic Games medal table
List of 1992 Summer Olympics medal winners
1992 Winter Olympics medal table
1992 Summer Paralympics medal table


== References ==