Animal Farm is a 2025 animated film that adapts the 1945 novella Animal Farm by George Orwell. It is directed by Andy Serkis and written by Nicholas Stoller. It stars Seth Rogen, Gaten Matarazzo, Woody Harrelson, Steve Buscemi, Glenn Close and Kieran Culkin. It is the third adaptation of the novella, following the 1954 animated film and the 1999 live-action film, with an alternative plot that introduces new characters such as a piglet named Lucky.
The film premiered at the 2025 Annecy International Animation Film Festival on 9 June 2025.


== Cast ==
Seth Rogen as Napoleon, a Saddleback boar who rises to power at Animal Farm
Gaten Matarazzo as Lucky, a piglet torn between Napoleon and Snowball's teachings
Kieran Culkin as Squealer, a small boar and Napoleon's aide
Glenn Close as Freida Pilkington, Mr. Jones' neighbor and a billionaire scheming to take over Animal Farm
Steve Buscemi as Mr. Whymper, Pilkington's right hand man
Laverne Cox as Snowball, a sow and Napoleon's rival. This is the first female version of the traditionally male character.
Woody Harrelson as Boxer, a horse
Jim Parsons as Carl, a sheep
Parsons also voices the rest of Carl's flock
Kathleen Turner as Benjamin, a donkey
Iman Vellani as Puff and Tammy, two piglets and Lucky's friends
Andy Serkis as:
Mr. Jones, the original owner of the farm
Old Major, an elderly boar who inspires the animals' revolt


== Production ==
In July 2011, a feature film adaptation of George Orwell's 1945 novella Animal Farm was announced to be in development, with Rupert Wyatt serving as director. Wyatt and Andy Serkis, who had worked together on Rise of the Planet of the Apes, were slated to serve as co-screenwriters. By October 2012, Serkis was announced to have taken over directorial duties, with the project being developed as a HFR-3D film. In August 2018, Netflix purchased distribution rights to the film. After numerous delays, Serkis once again began pre-production on the project, after completing his directing duties for Venom: Let There Be Carnage (2021).
By April 2022, it was announced that production had commenced as an animated film at Cinesite Studios, with a screenplay written by Nicholas Stoller. Serkis also served as producer, alongside Adam Nagle, Dave Rosenbaum, and Jonathan Cavendish with both Stoller and Wyatt set to serve as executive producers. Connie Nartonis Thompson (Frankenweenie) produced the film on behalf of Cinesite. The project is a joint-venture production between Cinesite, Aniventure, and the Imaginarium Productions, with Netflix dropping the distribution rights. In March 2023, during an interview with Screen Rant, Serkis stated that one year of production had passed while another year was left for the film. Deadline Hollywood reported in May 2024 that Animal Farm finished production.
In April 2025, the cast was announced, with Serkis, Seth Rogen, Steve Buscemi, Glenn Close, Iman Vellani, and Kieran Culkin among the additions.


== Release ==
Animal Farm had its world premiere on 9 June 2025, at the Annecy International Animation Film Festival. It premiered in the United Kingdom on 11 October 2025, at the 2025 BFI London Film Festival.


== Reception ==
Peter Debruge of Variety wrote, "Serkis' 21st-century update dilutes Orwell's political allegory in favor of what passes for something more 'audience friendly': His approach adopts the celebrity voices, cutesy character designs and antic, mile-a-minute energy of big-studio American toons. The result isn't nearly as polished as Illumination or DreamWorks movies, but 'good enough for government work,' as the saying goes."
Pete Hammond of Deadline wrote the following, "With a screenplay, alternately funny and frighteningly perceptive by Nicholas Stoller, this gorgeously animated version is not outwardly trying to be political but nevertheless is uncannily meeting its time and proving to be a little too close for comfort to America's drift toward authoritarianism."
Rafael Motamayor's review for IGN focused on the film's tonal shift from an allegory for the Russian Revolution and Joseph Stalin's rise to power to a metaphor for corrupt business in the 21st century. He wrote, "Serkis paints the terrifying rise of porcine dictator Napoleon...in a broader brush for a modern era of big business run amok. In toning down the more graphic elements of its descent into totalitarianism and simplifying the depths of its commentary, the director and performance-capture pioneer trades a dystopian tone for something a little more uplifting. It’s a fun movie with some creative visual choices and a great cast, but it’s also hard not to feel like it lost some teeth on its journey from the page to the screen."


== References ==


== External links ==
Animal Farm at IMDb