Big Brother 2025, also known as Big Brother 22, was the twenty-second series of Big Brother. It was the third civilian series of Big Brother to air on ITV2 after ITV plc gained the rights to the format, and the fifth series to air on the network overall. The series began on 28 September 2025 and was again co-presented by AJ Odudu and Will Best, who also returned to host the companion show, Big Brother: Late & Live, whilst Marcus Bentley returned to narrate the show, having done so since its inception in 2000. 
The series was extended by a week, with a run of 48 days, making it the longest series to air on ITV to date. Due to financial issues, Virgin Media Television in Ireland did not broadcast this series, as it had done since the sixteenth series in 2015. It concluded on 14 November 2025, when Richard Storry was announced as the winner of the series, with Elsa Rae finishing as the runner-up. At 60 years old, Storry became the oldest winner of the civilian version of Big Brother in the United Kingdom.


== Production ==
In November 2024, prior to the final of the previous series, it was announced that Big Brother would return on ITV in 2025, as well as a twenty-fourth celebrity series, which aired throughout April 2025, in celebration of Big Brother's 25th anniversary, with Odudu and Best returning as presenters. Speaking on the recommissioning of the programme, Paul Mortimer, Director of Reality Commissioning and Acquisitions said: Big Brother programming has firmly established itself across ITV's platforms and become a favourite with our viewers. Together, Big Brother and Celebrity Big Brother have grown audiences on ITV1 and ITV2 and amassed almost 100 million streams on ITVX. We're therefore very excited to be able to throw open the house doors once again for another series of both Big Brother and Celebrity Big Brother in 2025 which are sure to promise more unmissable entertaining and captivating moments.", whilst Katy Manley, Managing Director of Initial, added: "We are so excited to be coming back with more Celebrity Big Brother and Big Brother. Both series have really resonated with audiences, and we can't wait to make more. As always, viewers can look forward to Big Brother keeping housemates – celebrities and civilians alike – on their toes. Applications for the series opened on 14 November 2024, a day prior to the final of the previous series, and remained open until 8 August 2025.


=== Format ===
The series retained a similar format to the previous two civilian series on ITV, however was confirmed to run for a week longer in celebration of the show's 25th anniversary, instead running for 42 episodes, airing six nights a week from Sunday to Friday, with a 90-minute launch show and finale episode. The series ran for 48 days and began on 28 September 2025. ITV announced that the series would again feature a new cast of carefully selected housemates, from all walks of life with "cameras capturing [the housemates'] every move, and the nation following every twist and turn." Shopping tasks, nominations and live evictions will return, with the public once again voting throughout the series and ultimately determining the winner, who will walk away with a cash prize. Following the first eviction, it was announced that for the first time since the thirteenth series, the public would be voting to save rather than voting to evict. Big Brother: Late & Live followed afterwards on ITV2, airing from 10pm until 11pm from Sunday to Friday. The "house guest" panelists for this series consisted of Danny Beard, David Potts, Angellica Bell, Harriet Rose, Chloe Burrows, Oti Mabuse and JoJo Siwa respectively, who each appeared in a week's worth of episodes. Following this, the Big Brother: Live Stream covered live feed from the house on ITVX, which aired seven nights a week from 11pm until 2am from Sunday to Friday, and from 9pm until 2am on Saturdays. Due to the effects of Storm Amy, the first live eviction episode of the series was held from the Big Brother: Late & Live studio, with the evicted housemate being met by host Will Best at the entrance corridor, before leaving via the back door.


=== Eye logo ===
The official eye logo for the series was revealed during the initial trailer that aired on 4 August 2025. It depicts a purple background with various different coloured mazes, amongst them is 25 eyeballs, as a nod to the 25th anniversary of the show. Also featured are two sets of stairs and several doors. The purple, orange and white eyeball in the centre is surrounded by an orange and green spiral pattern similar to that used for the third series of Big Brother.


=== House ===
In December 2024, it was reported that ITV would move from the house located at Garden Studios to a new location in London ahead of the twenty-fourth celebrity series. The following month, it was announced that the house would be built at Titan Studios, rendering it the fourth house to be used for the series since the show's inception. The spin-off show Big Brother: Late & Live will be filmed in the neighbouring Versa Studios, who also acquired Titan Studios as a part of their expansion prior to the launch. Speaking on the new location, Jody Collins, director of Initial, the production company behind the show, said "The most iconic house on television has found a new home, and we couldn't be more delighted. The needs of the production are substantial and Versa [Studios] is uniquely equipped to meet these demands. Expect a season filled with exceptional and unforgettable reality moments—we cannot wait!". Meanwhile, Charlie Ingall, the executive director of the studios said: "Versa's expansion in London has been part of our ambitious growth strategy, and it further elevates our business as a first choice for large scale, high profile productions such as Big Brother. The significant investment we have made in this expansion gives us the ability to create long term homes for our clients, and in turn support the television and film community."
On 26 September 2025, two days before the show's launch, Richard Arnold conducted a tour of the kitchen and living area on Good Morning Britain whilst interviewing winner of the previous series Ali Bromley, with host Will Best subsequently conducting a further tour of the house on This Morning, before ITV revealed photos of the house on social media later that day. The corridor leading into the house featured hand ornaments coming from the wall holding light up eyeballs. The house maintained a similar structure to the twenty-fourth celebrity series, but with updated colour schemes. The living area and kitchen consisted of predominantly orange, turquoise, dark pink and purple furniture, with a new sofa design for the first time since the ITV revival, which was made of up separate blue and dark pink seating joined together as one. The dining table formed the shape of the series eye logo which was printed on top of it. The bedroom used a similar colour palette, with the room primarily consisting of blue and dark pink decor. The vanity station featured stool seating, one of which was shaped like a pair of hands, and mirrors with the eyeball from the centre of the eye logo printed on the back. The bathroom was mainly yellow and orange, with added blue and green decor, as well as stripy seats and a cushioned seating area near the bath. It has two toilets and two showers, as well as three sinks. The garden features artificial grass and has a cushioned seating area which primarily follows a blue and yellow theme, as well as a hot tub. The walls were made up of a variety of colours, and featured both a wooden effect with a cloud filled sky above, as well as an artificial plant wall. The eye at the bottom of the garden was turquoise with an orange border, and had a green and orange centre surrounding the two-way mirror, with sun loungers in front of it. The snug from the twenty-fourth celebrity series returned, which had an artificial plant wall on the outside, with wooden walls and two turquoise armchairs inside. The series theme was maintained throughout the house, with various ornaments and lights taking the shape of eyeballs and hands similar to those used in the trailer, as well as runs along the wall with eyeballs inside them, as in that of the eye logo. Several artificial plants are also featured in the house and in the garden. The corridor leading to the diary room was orange and green, with spherical white lights inside the walls. The diary room chair was revealed the following day, and was a circular chair that took the shape of the centre of the eye logo, featuring the same orange and green spiral pattern, with the purple, orange and white eyeball in the centre. The cushioning and the frame of the chair was pink, and was surrounded by a yellow outer frame that takes the shape of a run, with several eyeballs inside it.


=== Promotion ===
On 4 August 2025, the first 20-second teaser trailer aired during the ad-break of the final of the twelfth series of Love Island. The trailer features a yellow hand emerging from a pool of eyeballs, which subsequently picks up one of the eyeballs and throws it across the screen. A moving CCTV camera is then shown, depicting an eyeball as the lens. The eyeball is then released and bounces onto the ground, whilst another eyeball falls into its place. Further eyeballs are released from a chute within the wall, some of which bounce into a teacup with a picture of an eyeball in. Several of the eyeballs are then seen travelling along a metal ramp, before the eye in itself is revealed. A further trailer began airing on 9 September 2025, which featured shots of various locations and buildings in Britain, including the Tyne Bridge, The Shard and The O2 Arena, some of which had the eye logo projected onto them. Pedestrians were also seen walking along and members of the public watching clips from the previous series on mobile phones was accompanied by the voice of Big Brother who teased "more shocks, more strategy and more drama", which was followed up by a person with their feet up at home watching a clip of Big Brother featuring Odudu and Best, the latter of whom says "that's right" in agreement. A blueprint of the floor plan of the Big Brother house is depicted with the voice adding "The house is ready, the nation is ready, the question is; are you ready?". Odudu and Best respond with "ready, Big Brother" and "excited" respectively, before the voice concludes by stating
the tagline "the game is changing" and that "Big Brother is here to play". Throughout the trailer, the eye logo is seen in motion, with the eye in the centre narrowing it's eyelids and blinking, whilst the eyeballs roll around the maze of the eye.
Shorter versions of the trailer aired co-currently, one of which featured the voice asking Odudu and Best to "come to the Big Brother house", with the former telling Big Brother they have missed him, whilst the latter asks Big Brother if he has missed them, the eye then narrows with Odudu adding "I'll take that as a no". Another featured the voice asking Odudu and Best to "pick a number between 1 and 30" with Best picking 21 and Odudu choosing 15, before the voice responds "Incorrect. 28.", subsequently revealing that the series would begin on 28 September 2025. A further trailer featured the voice saying "The new housemates are about to arrive; they don't know what awaits them. Big Brother does." Best interjects by saying "And so do we", with the voice responding "No you don't" before Odudu questions "We don't?". The voice answers "no". Another version of the trailer featured the voice teasing "The house is ready; 52 microphones, 93 cameras, 1 Diary Room and more eyeballs than ever before." Odudu then says "You what. What does that mean Big Brother?". The voice addresses Odudu and Best and replies "You'll find out at the same time as everyone else.", before Best responds "I thought we were special." Another version featured the voice addressing the viewer saying "If you; yes you, are sitting on the left hand side of the sofa, you have been evicted. You must leave the room immediately". A final version of the trailer featured the voice saying "You are about to go head to head in a staring competition" with the eye logo narrowing it's eyelid before blinking. After which the voice says "Congratulations, you have beaten Big Brother". Each of the trailers concluded with the tagline. A social media teaser depicted a 3D version of the eye and the words "Big Brother Returns. 28th September. 9pm", whilst an eyeball rolls along metal ramps before dropping off and hitting coloured xylophone keys on the way down, which in turn light up and play the Big Brother theme tune. ITV also posted a promotional teaser on social media featuring Alan Carr in which Odudu's voice is heard saying "Big Brother dares you to do an 80's inspired dance", which Carr subsequently completed. Several teaser videos of Odudu and Best lip syncing to viral quotes were also posted in the lead up to the series.


== Housemates ==
Twelve housemates entered the house on Day 1, during the live launch. A further four entered the house on Day 2, which were revealed on Big Brother: Late & Live that evening. Emily Hewertson, who was evicted from the house on the first day following a twist, re-entered the house on Day 20, alongside Farida Khalifa, who was the first evictee of the twentieth series. They resided alongside the fake evictee in the secret room prior to returning to the house.

Notes


== Eyes ==
For this series, Eyes were introduced to the housemates as house currency. Throughout the series, housemates were able to earn, steal and collect Eyes in a number of tasks, which would ultimately give them power and the right to buy treats, privileges and advantages within the game. The table below lists the housemates' eye totals at the end of each corresponding week.


=== Week 1 ===
Following the shopping task on Day 4, Big Brother called for one housemate to come to the office; Zelah did so and was told that Big Brother would pay out a total of 300 eyes, with each housemate having to take the amount they thought they deserved, before choosing the next housemate to enter and so on. On Day 5, housemates entered the "Eyedeal Mini Mart" where they had the opportunity to spend their eye currencies. Teja purchased a chinese banquet voucher for four housemates costing 15 eyes, as well as a coffee hamper for 10 eyes and crisps for 5 eyes. Feyisola bought olives for 8 eyes. Marcus bought salted caramel crispies, Tate bought a melon and Elsa bought popcorn for 5 eyes each respectively. Meanwhile, Jenny bought a pamper hamper for 10 eyes. Caroline, Cameron K, Nancy, Richard, Sam and Zelah opted not to buy anything, whilst Cameron B, Gani and George were unable to enter due to their totals being 0.


=== Week 2 ===
For the task on Day 7, Cameron B and George, as the housemates with the fewest eyes, were appointed wardens and had to hand out the fines to housemates, and would earn commission from each fine, with the eyes being placed into a penalty pot. Meanwhile, housemates could earn eyes for themselves by reporting the rule breaks to wardens. At the end of the task, the wardens handed out a total of 28 fines, therefore accumulating 28 eyeballs which they opted to split between themselves. Following Cameron B's eviction on Day 13, he decided to donate his eyes to Nancy.


=== Week 3 ===
On Day 15, housemates re-entered the "Eyedeal Mini Mart" where they could spend their eye currencies. On offer was a "buy one get one free" immunity pass which would mean they'd be immune from the next two evictions. As the richest housemate, Caroline entered and placed the highest bid, ultimately winning. Zelah chose to spend 10 eyes on a protein hamper. Tate chose the "Send a housemate to jail card" for 10 eyes and chose to imprison Marcus for the evening. Marcus spent 10 eyes on a "Face-to-Face nominations" card and gave it to Tate, meaning he had to deliver his next nominations face-to-face, as well as a "Meal for Two" pass which he used for him and Elsa for 8 eyes, and Pick 'n' Mix for 4 eyes. Jenny bought a bar of chocolate for 5 eyes. Cameron K bought crisps for 4 eyes, and placed a bid on immunity for 2 eyes. Teja bought a bar of chocolate for 5 eyes, and bid on the immunity for 10 eyes. Feyisola bought a bottle of wine for 10 eyes, and a birthday music playlist pass for that evening's party, costing 6 eyes, as well as bidding on the immunity for 1 eye. Elsa bought Pick 'n' Mix, crisps and cookies, each costing 4 eyes each. Richard, Nancy and Sam were unable to enter due to their totals being 0.


=== Week 4 ===
On Day 25, during the shopping task, new housemates Farida and Emily entered the "Eyedeal Duty Free" store ahead of the shopping task, where Farida purchased a neck pillow and an energy drink, costing 5 and 2 eyes respectively and Emily bought sour cream crisps costing 3 eyes. Following Feyisola's eviction on Day 27, she opted to give her eyes to Teja.


=== Week 5 ===
On Day 29, housemates entered the "Eyedeal Minute Mart" again. As the richest housemates, Jenny and Tate entered first. Jenny purchased a phone call from home for 30 eyes, doughnuts for 8 eyes, chocolate for 5 eyes and Pick 'n' Mix for 4 eyes. Tate purchased a chicken, salt and pepper and an energy drink. Caroline, Teja and Zelah entered next. Caroline placed the only and winning bid of 21 eyes for a "Save and Replace" token, which could be used to save a nominated housemate and replace them with another following the next nominations. Teja purchased a pizza party token for her and three other housemates costing 20 eyes. Sam bought a bottle of wine, honey, chocolate biscuits and Pick 'n' Mix. Marcus bought popcorn and Pick 'n' Mix for 5 and 4 eyes respectively, whilst Zelah bought a bottle of crévant for 8 eyes, which was later confiscated following a rule break. Nancy bought a weaving kit for 10 eyes, whilst Emily bought a bottle of rosé for 8 eyes. Cameron K purchased Pick 'n' Mix and a watermelon for 4 and 3 eyes respectively. Richard, Farida and Elsa did not make any purchases. Following Farida and Zelah's evictions on Day 34, they chose to donate their eyes to Caroline and Cameron K respectively.


=== Week 6 ===
On Day 36, housemates entered the "Eyedeal Minute Mart" again. Teja placed the winning bid of 26 eyes for a video call with a loved one, and also purchased a nail hamper and Elsa's toy mouse for 10 eyes each, as well as a bag of popcorn for 4 eyes. Jenny purchased a Chicken Tikka Masala for 5 eyes. Elsa purchased a "Dinner for Two" voucher for 20 eyes, however unbeknownst to her, had to eat it alongside one of the housemates she nominated the previous week; she chose Richard. Tate chose to buy Caroline's photo back for 7 eyes. Marcus purchased a token that would send a housemate to the stocks; he chose Tate, whilst Richard placed an unsuccessful bid of 23 eyes for the video call from a loved one. Cameron K, Caroline, Emily, Nancy and Sam did not have any eyes and were unable to enter.


=== Week 7 ===
On Day 43, housemates entered the "Eyedeal Minute Mart" for the final time. Housemates were able to combine their eyes for this week's purchases. Tate and Cameron entered first and purchased their letters from home, as well as Teja's for 20 eyes each. Jenny and Marcus entered next, with Jenny purchasing her letter from home for 20 eyes and a book featuring photos of the housemates' highlights for 5 eyes, whilst Marcus bought Emily's shredded letter and sellotape for 22 eyes. Richard and Elsa entered last and purchased their letters, as well as a block of cheese, alongside Emily who bought Marcus' letter for a combined 65 eyes.


== Weekly summary ==
The main events in the Big Brother 22 house are summarised in the table below.


== Nominations table ==


=== Notes ===


== Ratings ==
Official 7-day consolidated ratings in the table below are taken from Thinkbox and include +1, but exclude viewership on devices.


=== Late & Live ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Big Brother at IMDb