"Die with a Smile" is a song by American singer-songwriters Lady Gaga and Bruno Mars. It was released as a standalone single on August 16, 2024, through Interscope Records, and was later included as the closing track of Gaga's studio album Mayhem (2025). Gaga and Mars wrote and produced the track alongside Dernst "D'Mile" Emile II and Andrew Watt while James Fauntleroy provided additional songwriting. The collaboration was a result of Mars inviting Gaga to his studio where he had been working on new music. He presented the track in progress to her and the duo finished writing and recording the song the same day. In the song, Gaga and Mars express a powerful longing to be with a loved one, highlighting the urgency and depth of their love in the face of uncertainty and potential endings.
Musically, the soft rock–leaning track has been compared to Gaga's 2016 album Joanne and her 2018 release, "Shallow" from the A Star Is Born soundtrack. An accompanying music video directed by Mars and Daniel Ramos showing both singers performing the song on a retro stage set was released simultaneously alongside the track. Music critics lauded both singers' vocals and chemistry.
The song saw great commercial success, becoming the longest-reigning daily number-one song in Spotify history, the fastest song to reach one, two and three billion streams on Spotify, and becoming one of the longest-reigning number-one songs in Billboard Global 200 chart history with eighteen weeks on top. The song topped the official charts in more than 30 countries, and peaked at the top ten in over 20 additional countries. It earned multiple diamond and platinum certifications in France and fourteen additional countries. "Die with a Smile" was nominated for Song of the Year and won for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 67th Annual Grammy Awards.


== Development ==
Lady Gaga and Bruno Mars first performed and sang together at the 2016 Victoria's Secret Fashion Show on November 30, 2016, as a part of the lineup. In June 2024, Mars mentioned he would like to collaborate with Gaga on a song or "sing with her on her Las Vegas residency". In a press release, Gaga revealed: "Bruno and I have a lot of mutual respect for each other and were talking about collaborating". She revealed that the collaboration materialized while she was recording her upcoming studio album in Malibu. One night, after a long day, Mars invited Gaga to his studio to listen to music he had been working on and presented the track to her. At this point, she was "blown away" when she heard what he was working on. The duo finished writing and recording the song on the same night. Gaga described Mars' talent as "beyond explanation" and "next level", while Mars added that Gaga made the song "magical".
On August 12, Mars and Gaga started following each other on Instagram. On the same day, Gaga posted a series of emojis on Mars' Instagram post from his tour stop in Mexico City. On August 13, Gaga shared a video of herself playing a few chords of the song on a piano. During the video, she wore a shirt with Mars' face. The following day, Mars posted a photo wearing a T-shirt with Gaga's face on it.


== Release ==
Previously, a post from Hits magazine's "Rumor Mill", announced a collaboration between Gaga and Mars, revealing the song's title. "Die with a Smile" was officially announced days later on August 15. The accompanying artwork shows the artists dressed in "country-leaning" red-and-blue "Western" outfits with Gaga smoking a cigarette and Mars wearing a cowboy hat. Representatives for Gaga initially claimed the song would be a standalone single. However, it was later announced that the song would be on her eighth studio album, with Gaga calling it a "huge part" of the album and its "missing piece."


== Composition ==

"Die with a Smile" featured writing and producing credit from Gaga, Mars, Dernst "D'Mile" Emile II, and Andrew Watt, with additional writing on the track by James Fauntleroy. The song was written and recorded at Gaga's studio in Los Angeles in 2024. It has been labeled as a pop-soul and soft rock song, displaying the emotional style of a pop and soul ballad. Billboard's Kyle Denis described the song as a soaring ballad that blends pop, soul, country, and rock. Critics found the sound to be influenced by 1970s soft rock. Joey Nolfi of Entertainment Weekly defined the song as a "spiritual sequel" to Gaga's 2018 single "Shallow". According to the sheet music published by BMG Rights Management on Musicnotes, "Die with a Smile" is composed in the key of A major with a slow tempo of 52 beats per minute. The vocal range spans from G3 to E5.
Regarding the writing and recording process, Gaga explained that one night she was working on her next album at a studio in Malibu when she received a call from Mars, who invited her to another studio nearby to listen to a song he had been working on. She said: "I went to see him at around 10 p.m. He showed me the idea, and then we wrote the second verse. We recorded it by 2 a.m. Bruno had a very specific way he wanted it to sound, and I wanted to give him that." She also mentioned that they aimed for the harmonies to feel "very 1970s" and were inspired by the collaborations between Carole King and James Taylor during the creative process. In an interview with the Los Angeles Times, she stated:

I remember feeling that it was a song people needed to hear. I write music all the time, and sometimes you feel like you're creating something that some people might like. But there are other times when you work on something, and you just know it's going to speak deeply to all kinds of people. I knew it immediately.
Producer Watt told Rolling Stone that the making of "Die with a Smile" as "as old-school as it gets," recalling that Mars and Fauntleroy began playing while Gaga wrote out the chords and bass changes. He said they "started breaking down the song together, singing and arranging harmonies," and noted that "everything on that song is live — drums, bass, guitars, vocals," giving it a raw and organic sound. In a later interview with People, Watt expanded on the recording session, revealing that he, Gaga, and Michael Polansky drove from Malibu to Mars' studio to finish the track overnight during the Mayhem sessions. He recalled that the pair worked until 5 a.m., with Gaga set for another commitment just hours later, and described their recording dynamic as a "healthy competition" reminiscent of Quincy Jones and Michael Jackson.


== Critical reception ==
"Die with a Smile" received widespread critical acclaim. Brittany Spanos of Rolling Stone noted "the new track puts the duo's soaring vocals on full display". Robin Murray of Clash magazine gave the song eight out of ten stars, describing it as  "a homage to those lush 70s duets" that "also feels profoundly modern". He added that "both artists shine, but there's an undoubted chemistry here that lets 'Die with a Smile' have a character of its own". Murray noted that "there's a feeling of mutual respect on this latest single, with both artists serving to push each other to different spaces", and said that "it's camp in places, but that's simple exuberant fun and hyped-up colour – the essential songwriting remains intact, plucking at those heartstrings". He concluded that the collaboration is "an unexpected triumph, one that leans on the strengths of both artists, before presenting something new". Jake Viswanath of Bustle wrote that the song "blends Gaga's emotive pop melodies with Mars' old-school R&B influences", with addictional "twang-y instrumentation", into a "sweepingly romantic and devastating" song which "portrays two lovers who want to experience their last moments with each other". AllMusic's Neil Z. Yeung found it to be a "simple but sublime duet" which "will prove to be one of Gaga's most timeless, classic tunes."
Paul Grein of Billboard called the song a "match made in Grammy heaven" and an "instant smash", while the publication's Stephen Daw noted how "Gaga's powerful, soulful voice blends excellently with Bruno Mars' energetic belt". The New York Times dubbed the song "a romantic, lightly apocalyptic slow-dance that offers both the opportunity to belt to the rafters." Vulture opined that "for a power ballad between two A-listers, it's genuinely humble — their voices not competing, but intertwining and uplifting one another, with Gaga nailing Bruno's distinctly smooth-soul melodies." The Independent's Adam White described it as "a tender, gentle love song that serves both Gaga and Mars very well." Consequence's Paolo Ragusa called it a "simple, satisfying love ballad" where Gaga's voice "blends gorgeously with Mars'". He added that while the song isn't breaking any new grounds for either artists, it's "a collaboration that lives up to its star-studded package". Mary Siroki from the same publication said it's "perfectly fine", with great vocals, however she found it somewhat underwhelming compared to the two artists past catalogue, claiming it lacks the replay appeal of their biggest hits. Writing for The Quietus, CJ Thorpe-Tracey was more negative and called the song an "artificial mid-paced ballad [which] sort of soars, but never engages actual emotion."
Melissa Ruggieri of USA Today ranked "Die with a Smile" as the fifth best song of 2024. She praised the track's retro-inspired exploration of enduring love, the complementary artistic styles of the two performers, and Mars' rhythmic production choices—particularly his use of drums to enhance the song's emotional intensity rather than serve as simple background. Billboard, in its editorial list of staff picks for the best songs of 2024, ranked it twenty-first, complimenting its timeless production, theatrical vocal performances, and strong replay value. 


=== Reactions towards the song's inclusion on Mayhem ===
As "Die with a Smile" was initially promoted as a standalone single, several journalists commented on its eventual inclusion on Gaga's Mayhem in their album reviews. Stephen Ackroyd of Dork opined that due to its "dramatic, cinematic" nature, the song "fits perfectly as the album's curtain-closer." The Line of Best Fit's David Cobbald remarked, "the inclusion of 'Die With A Smile' raises the question of if the album was toned down to make the track fit in its closing spot", but added that "it certainly doesn't feel out of place with the final product." Conversely, Thomas Stremfel of Spectrum Culture believed the track's addition to Mayhem "screams 'label interference.'", and it "stick[s] out like a sore thumb". Both Exclaim! and Stereogum found the song to be "tacked on". For The Wall Street Journal's Mark Richardson, "it feels slightly out of place here, more anonymous than what comes before". Clash reviewer Robin Murray said it's an "uneasy climax", as "the song feels tonally distinct from the album's strange, H.R Giger bio-mechanical lust." Billboard's Stephen Daw praised the song but described it as an "afterthought" on Mayhem, or an epilogue to an album that otherwise takes bigger risks and embraces chaos. Still, he noted that if the goal was to close the album on a gentler note, the track succeeds. A similar opinion was shared by NME's Nick Levine, who described it as "a palate cleanser after a feast of bold flavours".


== Commercial performance ==


=== United States ===
Billboard reported that "Die with a Smile" sold over 14,000 digital copies in the United States during its first four days of availability and a full tracking week of 21,000 copies sold (digital and physical combined). It peaked at number one on Spotify, Apple Music, and iTunes during its release week. The track debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart for the week dated August 31, 2024, becoming Mars' 19th top 10 and Gaga's 18th in the country. The duet debuted at number one on the Digital Song Sales chart, becoming Mars 10th chart topper and Gaga's 9th. In its second week on the charts, the song fell to number six on the Hot 100, selling another 6,000 copies. However, with its ongoing stay in the Top 10 on Hot 100, the song later reached number two for the week dated November 9, 2024, with 45.3 million radio airplay impressions, 22.6 million streams, and 16,000 sold), with three new versions released during the tracking week. During the tracking week, all the versions, including the original, instrumental, acoustic, and the "Live in Las Vegas" versions, were discounted to 69 cents on the iTunes store.
For the week dated January 11, 2025, it topped the chart (with 59.7 million radio airplay impressions, 27.1 million streams, and 6,000 sold), becoming the first song to ascend to the top of the chart in 2025, as well as Gaga's sixth and Mars' ninth number-one single. The song also made Gaga the first 21st century-debuting act, the second ever female artist after Janet Jackson, and the third artist overall after Michael Jackson, to achieve multiple chart-topping songs in three different decades. In addition, Gaga also matched Diana Ross and Paula Abdul in joint seventh place for the most U.S. number one singles by female artists. It spent five non-consecutive weeks at the top of the Hot 100, becoming Gaga’s first song to spend more than one week at number one since "Born This Way" in 2011, and Mars' third song to top the chart for five weeks or more. On October 20, 2025, Billboard updated the rules of its charts, disqualifying any song with more than 52 weeks that was no longer in the top ten. As a result, "Die with a Smile" left the Billboard Hot 100 in its 60th week, despite still being within the top twenty.
On the Billboard Pop Airplay chart, the song reached the top, becoming Gaga's first chart topper there since 2011's "Born This Way" and eighth overall in her career. It also became Bruno Mars' first since 2016's "Finesse" and tenth overall in his career. In addition, Gaga also became the fourth act to earn number-one entries in the United States in each of the 2000s, 2010s, and 2020s decades, following Maroon 5, Taylor Swift, and Miley Cyrus. It extends its record as the 4th longest-running Top 10 hit in Hot 100 chart history (51 Weeks).


=== International ===
"Die with a Smile" reached the summit of the Billboard Global 200 and Global Excl. US singles charts in its second week, becoming the first chart-topper on both for Gaga and Mars, having accumulated over 97 million streams globally, 30 million of which were from the US. Spending eighteen weeks atop the chart between 2024 and 2025, it overtook "Apt." by Rosé and Mars for the longest such reign by any music release originating from the 2024 calendar year, and also overtook Harry Styles' "As It Was" to become the second longest-reigning overall (and the longest-running non-holiday) number-one song in the said chart's history (behind Mariah Carey's "All I Want for Christmas Is You"). It is the only song to be streamed weekly over 100 million times globally for a twenty-week period. On November 20, 2024, "Die with a Smile" became the fastest song to reach 1 billion streams on Spotify and the only song to do so in under 100 days, completing the feat after only 96 days. It surpassed the previous record held by Jungkook and Latto's "Seven" (2023), which achieved the milestone in 108 days. By mid-December, "Die with a Smile" was established as the most viral song of 2024 on Spotify, amassing over 1.6 billion streams within 17 weeks and becoming the most shared song from the platform on social media. On May 8, 2025, the song achieved the most days at number one on the Spotify Global daily chart with 200 non-consecutive days, surpassing Tones and I's "Dance Monkey" (2019).
In the United Kingdom, "Die with a Smile" debuted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart, making it Mars' 11th top 10 on the chart and Gaga's 15th. The song slowly climbed the chart for the following three weeks before entering the top 5 at number five in its fifth week on the chart. In its ninth week on the chart, the song reached a new peak of number two for one week.
In Brazil, "Die with a Smile" debuted at number thirteen on the Billboard Brasil Hot 100, the highest-charting international song on the chart that week; it peaked at number four on the chart dated October 19, 2024. In Australia, it debuted at number ten on the ARIA Singles Chart dated August 26, 2024, becoming Mars' 17th top 10 on the chart and Gaga's 15th. The song ascended through the top 10 of the chart for several weeks before reaching a new peak of number two in its fifth week. In New Zealand, the song debuted at number one on the Top 40 Singles Chart and dominated for nine consecutive weeks. The song additionally spent thirteen total weeks at the runner-up spot.
In the Philippines, the song debuted at number six on the Philippines Hot 100 chart dated August 31, 2024. On its fourth week, it climbed to the top of the chart, becoming the first international acts to achieve this milestone, as well as becoming the international song with the longest run at #1 in the country during the 2024 calendar year. Elsewhere, the song topped the national charts in Argentina, Belgium, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the region of MENA, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Suriname, Switzerland, the United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.


== Music video ==

Gaga revealed via Instagram alongside the song's announcement that its accompanying music video would be released simultaneously with the track at 9 PM PDT. The music video, directed by Mars and Daniel Ramos, shows Gaga and Mars in the blue outfits they are wearing on the song's cover art. 
The clip shows the duo performing the song on a retro stage of a TV studio set, populated by faceless mannequins, as a black-and-white camera records them. It opens with Mars singing and playing the guitar before the camera pans out to reveal Gaga sitting at a piano with a cigarette in her mouth; later, she leaves the instrument to dance beside him. The pair perform alongside a live band as flashing lights accentuate the stage atmosphere. In an interview with the Los Angeles Times, Gaga explained why she chose to smoke a cigarette in the video right up until the moment before her first verse: "I wanted to create the semblance of a character who had something to say. And it's slightly subversive — like, you're talking about the world ending and I'm having a cigarette. There’s something kind of dark about it."
Billboard and Variety described the video as a "retro Nashville-inspired concept," while other outlets noted it pays tribute to duos such as Elton John and Kiki Dee or Sonny Bono and Cher, and suggested it could reference the relationship between Joker and Harley Quinn in Joker: Folie à Deux (2024), which also stars Gaga. The video reached one billion views on YouTube in April 2025, becoming Gaga's fourth and Mars's tenth video to surpass the milestone. The video was later nominated for Video of the Year at the 2025 MTV Video Music Awards, and won Favorite Music Video at the 2025 American Music Awards.


== Live performances ==

Gaga and Mars performed "Die with a Smile" live for the first time on August 15, 2024, as part of Mars' show for the opening of Intuit Dome in Los Angeles. The duo donned attire similar to what they wear in the song's accompanying visuals. After Mars welcomed Gaga to the stage as part of the show's encore, they replicated the song's music video on stage, with Mars at the guitar and Gaga playing the keys. Rolling Stone's Brittany Spanos described the performance as "sublime" and "emotionally charged," while Thania Garcia of Variety wrote that "Mars saved the best for last by bringing out Gaga, who sang with a passion that swelled into the grand chorus, where their voices merged as one." On August 27, 2024, the duo performed the song together a second time at the concert residency, Bruno Mars at Park MGM in Las Vegas. The video was later released on Mars' YouTube channel on October 29, 2024. 
In 2024, Mars performed a solo piano version of "Die with a Smile" as part of a medley, replacing "Smokin out the Window". He first sang it during the Brazil leg of his Bruno Mars Live tour (2022–2024). Gaga also performed a solo rendition of the song during a Christmas special of Carpool Karaoke, released on Apple TV+ on December 15, 2024. During her 2025 promotional concerts for Mayhem, which included a headlining set at Coachella 2025, Gaga again performed the track solo, wearing a regal blue dress and black headpiece and playing on a piano decorated with skulls. The song was later added to the set list of the Mayhem Ball tour, where Gaga performed it on piano, wearing a sheer black hooded cloak.


== Accolades ==


== Personnel ==
Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Mayhem.
Recording

Recorded at Shampoo Press & Curl Studios
Mixed at MixStar Studios (Virginia Beach, Virginia)
Mastered at Sterling Sound (New York City)
Personnel


== Charts ==


== Certifications ==


== Release history ==


== References ==