Jennifer Damaris (known as DJ Minx and formerly Jennifer Witcher) is a house and techno DJ and producer from Detroit, Michigan. She is the founder of the DJ collective 'Women on Wax', and accompanying record label Women on Wax Recordings.


== Biography ==


=== Life and career ===
Witcher was born in Detroit in 1967, the youngest sibling of five children. In June 2021, as part of Pride month, Damaris came out as a lesbian.
Witcher began DJing in the 1990s, after witnessing established DJs perform at Detroit's Music Institute.
She engineered and hosted the electronic music show Deep Space Radio, on WGPR (Detroit), and hosted the University of Canada weekly radio programme Steamy Windows on CJAM 91.5 FM. She went on to become a resident of Club Motor in Hamtramck. Damaris performed at the first Detroit Electronic Music Festival in 2000, has performed at many editions of the Detroit techno festival Movement, and regularly plays at venues and large festivals across the U.S. and internationally.
In 2001, Damaris began producing, first resulting in the Introduction EP, followed by Airborne in 2001, a four-tracker which included the track "A Walk in the Park". In 2003, "A Walk in the Park" was re-released in 2004 on Richie Hawtin's label, Minus. In recognition of the track’s 20th anniversary, it was remixed by Seth Troxler, Ardalan, and Soul Clap. DJ Minx also did an edit, which was to be released prior to the Movement Festival in 2023.
In 2015, Mixmag named her as one of the 20 women who have shaped the history of dance music, and in 2016, Time Out New York named her one of the "best house music DJs of all time". In 2018, she was awarded the Spirit of Detroit award, by the city of Detroit.
In 2020, Damaris launched the online clothing store Behind the Grüv. The following year, in recognition of Pride Month, DJ Minx's portrait was painted on the side of Detroit's Ruth Ellis Center by Philadelphia-based artist ggggrimes, and her single "Purse First" was released, with proceeds benefiting REC. She also released an EP titled Queendom on London-based HE.SHE.THEY.
Also in 2020, DJ Minx made her first appearance on BBC Radio 1's Essential Mix. Her song "Do It All Night" previously featured on Carl Craig's 2019 mix Detroit Love, Vol. 2, and was given a full release on Planet E, with remixes by Craig and Honey Dijon. 
In 2025, DJ Minx played a halftime set for the Detroit Pistons on March 15th


=== Women on Wax ===
In 1996, Damaris founded the DJ collective Women on Wax, a platform for female DJs from Detroit.
In 2001, she established the record label Women on Wax Recordings. Damaris went on to create a sub-imprint of the label called W.O.W. B.A.M. (Women on Wax Bangin' Ass Music), and collaborates and produces on other labels.


== References ==


== External links ==
DJ Minx at Women on Wax Recordings
DJ Minx at SoundCloud