There have been 13 British monarchs since the political union of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland on 1 May 1707. The first British monarch was Anne, who reigned between 1707 and 1714; the current monarch is Charles III since his accession in September 2022. Although the informal style of "King of Great Britain" had been in use since the personal union of England and Scotland on 24 March 1603 under James VI and I, the official title came into effect legislatively in 1707 and therefore British monarchs do not include monarchs who held both the title of Monarch of England and Monarch of Scotland at the same time.
On 1 January 1801, the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Ireland merged to create the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. This later became the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland upon the secession of the Irish Free State (now the Republic of Ireland) in the 1920s. British monarchs have also held various other titles reflecting their claims outside of the United Kingdom, including Elector of Hanover, Emperor of India, and Head of the Commonwealth; they also hold various secondary titles for land within the United Kingdom, such as the Duchy of Lancaster.


== Background ==

Before 1603, the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland were independent states with different monarchs. However, James VI of Scotland inherited the monarchy of England (becoming James VI and I) from his cousin Elizabeth I, meaning that the two independent countries shared a monarch known as the Union of the Crowns. Between November 1606 and July 1607 unification between the two countries was discussed at Westminster. While the English Parliament agreed to certain concessions to the Scots, it refused union. In October 1604, James VI and I declared himself to be the 'King of Great Britain' rather than the simultaneous monarch of both. The style was used on coins, stamps, and elsewhere, however the Parliament of England refused its official use or him legally becoming the King of a single unified country.
Anne ascended the throne on 8 March 1702 upon the death of her brother-in-law William III, becoming Queen of England and Queen of Scotland. In November that year, Anne began negotiations with the Parliament of Scotland about a possible union of the two countries, but by 1704 they had ended without a deal. In 1706, a new proposal was debated that involved shared unity rather than Scotland joining England under a new country called 'Great Britain', which was more preferable to Scotland. A final version of the proposal was presented to Anne in July that year. In January and March 1707, the Treaty of Union was passed by the Scottish and English parliaments respectively, with the union beginning from May.
Despite having eighteen pregnancies, Anne did not produce an heir that survived her or to adulthood. England had passed the Act of Settlement 1701 which defined Sophia of Hanover and her heirs as the successor to Anne and disqualified Catholics from becoming monarch. However, Scotland had passed its own law, the Act of Security 1704, which allowed its parliament to choose an heir upon Anne's death. On Union, Great Britain adopted the English succession and the Act of Security was repealed. When Anne died in 1714, she was succeeded by George I, Sophia of Hanover's eldest son. However, those who believed Scotland should have chosen the exiled Catholic James Francis Edward Stuart (known as 'The Old Pretender') instead rebelled in the Jacobite rising of 1715, which was quashed by Great Britain.


== Statistics ==
The thirteen monarchs consist of ten kings and three queens. Only two monarchs were born outside of the United Kingdom; these were George I and George II, who were both born in Osnabrück, a city in Hanover, Germany. All but two monarchs died in the United Kingdom: George I died while he was still King, during a trip to his birth place; Edward VIII (by then Prince Edward, Duke of Windsor) died in Villa Windsor, Paris, while living in exile in France having abdicated over 35 years beforehand. The longest reigning monarch was Elizabeth II who reigned for 70 years and 214 days between 1952 and 2022; the shortest reigning monarch was Edward VIII, who reigned for 326 days between January and December 1936. Only eleven of the thirteen monarchs have been crowned as a monarch of Great Britain or the United Kingdom: Anne was crowned in 1702 as both Queen of England and Queen of Scotland, because it was before the Treaty of Union; and Edward VIII abdicated before he could be coronated. Upon his accession in 2022, Charles III became the first monarch to have divorced and then remarried; however, George IV had tried to illegally marry Maria Fitzherbert in 1785 and later acknowledged its status as void in return for money from Parliament.


=== Other titles ===
Between George I and William IV, all monarchs had the additional office of Elector of Hanover (later King of Hanover). Hanover was a separate Kingdom with its own government and army, which the British government were often forced to help defend; during the 18th century, the French army invaded the territory whenever it declared war with Great Britain. In 1806, George III even declared war on Prussia after King Frederick William III, under heavy pressure from Napoleon, had annexed George III's German possessions. When Victoria acceded to the throne in 1837, she could not become the Queen of Hanover suo jure as it followed Salic law, meaning that it was no longer held in personal union with the British monarchy. Instead, her uncle Ernest Augustus became King of Hanover.
As well as being the monarch of Great Britain (1707–1801) or the United Kingdom (1801–), monarchs have held various other titles ex officio. On 1 May 1876, Victoria accepted the title of Empress of India from then-Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli. Monarchs held this title until George VI issued a Royal Proclamation renouncing it on 22 June 1948; this was an independent event from India's secession from the United Kingdom. Both India and Pakistan are independent republics within the Commonwealth of Nations. Since 1949, the monarch has instead been the ceremonial Head of the Commonwealth. The monarch also holds all titled that have been merged into the Crown, such as the Duke of Lancaster, which has been a secondary title of the monarch since 1399, and Duke of Normandy, which has been a secondary title of the monarch since 1106.


== List ==


== Timeline ==
The timeline of each British monarch's reign:


== See also ==

Family tree of the British royal family
List of monarchs in Britain by length of reign
Lists of monarchs in the British Isles
List of British royal consorts
List of current British princes and princesses


== Notes ==


== References ==