The Jungle Book is a 3D CGI animated television series produced by Indian animation studio DQ Entertainment, French animation companies MoonScoop (Season 1–2), Ellipsanime Productions (Season 3), Les Cartooneurs Associés (Season 3), German broadcasting network ZDF and its production & distribution arm ZDF Enterprises. TF1 handled the participation for seasons 1 and 2. It is based on the Rudyard Kipling book of the same name.


== Plot ==
The Jungle Book is about the adventures of Mowgli, a human foundling raised by Akela's wolf pack, and his best friends, fatherly bear Baloo and playful panther Bagheera. They live in the Indian jungle where many dangers lurk, such as the mighty Bengal tiger Shere Khan. The inquisitive Mowgli often gets himself into trouble and can't resist helping animals in danger or solving other problems.


== Characters ==


=== Main ===
Mowgli (voiced by Emma Tate in seasons 1–2 and Sarah Natochenny in season 3) is a human boy raised by wolves in the jungle, as the adoptive son of Daruka and Raksha, and the adoptive brother of Lali and Bala. He keeps a tiger claw as a pendant which he took in a battle from Shere Khan. His first Hindi voice was Vaibhav Thakkar who was replaced by Pooja Punjabi.
Bagheera (voiced by Jimmy Hibbert in seasons 1–2 and Abe Goldfarb in season 3) is a black panther. He is Mowgli's best friend. Unlike most other adaptations (like Disney's 1967 film), Bagheera is not as wise or strict as in the book. Most animals in the jungle never dare to step in the way of the panther. He often fights Shere Khan to save Mowgli. His first Hindi voice was Rajesh Kava.
Baloo (voiced by Jimmy Hibbert in seasons 1–2 and David Wills in season 3) is a Himalayan brown bear. In the series, like his Disney counterpart, Baloo can be lazy at times, loves to eat honey and enjoys singing. He is also bipedal, wears glasses and he is Mowgli's strict but wise mentor like in the original book. Baloo likes to tell stories of the jungle. His first Hindi voice was Mayur Vyas.
Kaa (voiced by Joseph J. Terry in seasons 1–2, Billy Bob Thompson in season 3) is an Indian python who is sort of friends with Mowgli, Bagheera, and Baloo, yet moody and feared.


=== Seeonee Wolf Pack ===
Akela (voiced by Joseph J. Terry in seasons 1–2) is an elderly Indian wolf who is the most trusted leader of the Seeonee Wolf Pack. He is the father of Daruka, the father-in-law of Raksha, and the grandfather of Lali, Bala and Phaona. His first Hindi voice was Manish Bhawan.
Daruka (voiced by Aaron Albertus in seasons 1–2) is the mate of Raksha, the father of Lali and Bala, and the adoptive father of Mowgli. Although Mowgli usually lives with Baloo and Bagheera, he visits Daruka's family sometimes.
Raksha is the mate of Daruka, the mother of Lali and Bala, and the adoptive mother of Mowgli. She is patient and motherly, but can be stern when necessary.
Lali (voiced by Emma Tate in seasons 1–2) is the daughter of Daruka and Raksha, the older sister of Bala, and the adoptive sister of Mowgli. She is sweet, and caring, like her mother, but can be extremely protective and rebellious. Her grandfather is Akela.
Bala (voiced by Teresa Gallagher in seasons 1–2) is the son of Daruka and Raksha, the younger brother of Lali, and adoptive brother of Mowgli. He is a brave and loyal, but competitive wolf, who often gets in trouble. His grandfather is Akela. His Hindi voice is Swapnil Kumari.


=== Villains ===
Shere Khan (voiced by David Holt in seasons 1–2 and Marc Thompson in season 3) is a Bengal tiger who is the main antagonist of the series. He plans to kill and eat Mowgli, but often fails in his attempts. He has a scar on his left eye. Shere Khan lost one of his claws in an earlier fight with Mowgli who keeps the claw as a pendant.
Tabaqui (voiced by Nigel Pilkington in seasons 1–2) is an Indian jackal. He is Shere Khan's sycophantic, greedy, devious sidekick where he lacks the courage to disagree with his tiger master. He is usually the one to set up traps for Mowgli so Shere Khan can eat him.
Bandar-log are a group of langurs who like to cause trouble for Mowgli and his friends. They live in the Cold Lair temple ruins.
Masha (voiced by Teresa Gallagher in seasons 1–2) is a langur who is the queen of the Bandar-logs.
Jacala (voiced by David Holt in seasons 1–2) is a mugger crocodile who would eat anyone that trespasses into his territory. He also has five sons. Despite his grumpy personality, he is a caring and loving father to his sons.
Kala (voiced by David Holt in season 1-2) is a black panther who looks like Bagheera. He is highly territorial and hostile towards Bagheera and Mowgli. He has a scar on his right eye.
Phaona (voiced by Aaron Albertus in seasons 1–2) is an Indian wolf who is the grandson of Akela and another one of Mowgli's adoptive Brothers. Despite being one of Mowgli's adoptive brothers, he dislikes Mowgli being in the wolf pack, tries every attempt to expel the adopted human from the pack, and will stop at nothing to attempt becoming the next pack leader. Phaona's plots tend to backfire and he tends to get punished by his grandfather.
Harjeet/Harjit (voiced by David Holt in seasons 1–2) is a bad-tempered honey badger.
Kaloo is a crow who works for Shere Khan, and has a rivalry with Tabaqui.


=== Other animals ===
Darzi (voiced by Peter Michail/Teresa Gallagher in seasons 1–2) is a tiny red sunbird without a mate or nest. Brave for her size and friendly, but poor as a messenger (as in the book) causing bird-brain and terrible memory.
Hathi (voiced by Phil Lollar in seasons 1–2) is a wise Indian elephant who is the leader of the jungle's elephants.
Gajjini is a light violet elephant who is the wife of Hathi.
Appu and Hita are Hathi and Gajjini's two calves who are Mowgli's friends.
Rangoo is a colourful fruit-eating bird.
Cheel is a kite.
Ikki is an Indian crested porcupine.
Rikki-Tikki-Tavi (voiced by Nigel Pilkington in seasons 1–2) is an Indian gray mongoose. Here he lives in the jungle with the other animals. He is very cute-faced, ferret-sized and fearless (once even fought with Shere Khan in order to defend Mowgli).
Thuu is an Indian cobra, occasionally the leader of a cobra's nest.
Manny is a young langur who is friends with Mowgli.
Oo and Boo are a couple of old turtles.
Pavo is a leucistic peacock who has poor eyesight (a common trait for albino animals in real life).
Alonna is a demoiselle crane.
Hoola/Phoola is a peacock who is Pavo's rival.
Rana is a wild pig who has a short temper.
Langur is a Himalayan langur is a friend of Mowgli.
Ravi and Vira are a bluebird couple.
Chota is a Bengal tiger cub who is friends with Mowgli.
Ponya is a red panda.
ChuChip/ChooChip is a young sambar deer whom Mowgli befriends.
Bella is a female bear that Baloo falls for, but she's actually trying to get rid of Baloo, but she later reformed after she and Baloo reconcile.
Bara is a barasingha deer who dreams of becoming one of Santa's flying reindeer.
Lori is a loris who is always worried about Bara.
Ackney is an Indian giant squirrel.
Chappal is an adult sambar deer and the father of Chuchip.
Chanda is an adult Bengal tiger and the mother of Chota.
Anupam is a blind monkey and mentor who teaches Mowgli how to get around without the use of his eyes.


== Production ==
DQ Entertainment announced the series on 30 March 2009, which would comprise fifty-two 11-minute episodes and a 60-minute feature-length film. French network TF1, German network ZDF, and its production arm ZDF Enterprises were announced as co-production partners, the latter holding distribution rights to the series in most countries except for French- and English-speaking territories, Ireland, the Middle East and Latin America, while Universal Pictures International Entertainment secured home video rights in the UK, France, Australia, New Zealand and Japan and select other countries. MoonScoop joined as the series' co-producer in May. In November, DQ secured a broadcast partner deal with Buena Vista International to exclusively air the series on Disney Channel networks in twenty-nine Asian territories, including India and Japan. Additional broadcast partner deals included ABC (Australia) in December 2009, CBBC (United Kingdom) and TVO (Canada) in April 2010 and JCCTV (United Arab Emerates) in April 2011.
In February 2011, the series was renewed for a second season; this time produced as a co-production between DQ and ZDF Enterprises with the same broadcast partners from Series 1 returning. Tapaas Chakravarti, Chairman and CEO of DQ Entertainment, said that they decided to make the second season of Jungle Book after the tremendous success of the first season in India and globally. The animated series had a fan following and, in his view, created the need to see more stories about Mowgli and his jungle friends. Tapas said that the second season will be followed by a TV movie special, a Christmas special, a Halloween special and many other spin-offs. The partnership between DQ Entertainment and ZDF was described as symbiotic as they were producing several other projects for them.
An animated feature film based on the series was released in 2013. The film was produced by Tapaas Chakravarti, and directed by Jun Falkenstein and Kevin Johnson.
In October 2015, DQ renewed the series for a third season. ZDF and ZDF Enterprises remained as co-producers, while MoonScoop's co-producer role was replaced with Paris-based French animation studio Ellipsanime Productions which had purchased their assets in January 2014. Piwi+ replaced TF1 as the French broadcast partner.


== Episodes ==


=== Series overview ===


=== Season 1 (2010–11) ===


=== Season 2 (2016–17) ===


=== Christmas Special (2018) ===


=== Season 3 (2019–20) ===


== See also ==
List of Indian animated television series
Motu Patlu
Gattu Battu
Rudyard Kipling


== References ==


== External links ==
The Jungle Book at IMDb – the series
The Jungle Book at IMDb – the film
The Jungle Book streaming on ZEE5