Tobacco package warning messages or Tobacco packages product warnings messages are warning messages that appear on the packaging of cigarettes and other tobacco products concerning their health effects. They have been implemented in an effort to enhance the public's awareness about the harmful effects of smoking. In general, warnings used in different countries try to emphasize the same messages. Warnings for some countries are listed below. Such warnings have been required in tobacco advertising for many years, with the earliest mandatory warning labels implemented in the United States in 1966. Implementing tobacco warning labels has been strongly opposed by the tobacco industry, most notably in Australia, following the implementation of plain packaging laws.
The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, adopted in 2003, requires such warning messages to promote awareness against smoking.
The effectiveness of tobacco warning labels has been studied extensively over the past 50 years, and research shows that they are generally effective in changing smoking attitudes and behaviors. A 2009 science review determined that there is "clear evidence that tobacco package health warnings increase consumers' knowledge about the health consequences of tobacco use". The warning messages "contribute to changing consumers' attitudes towards tobacco use as well as changing consumers' behavior".
Despite the demonstrated benefits of warning labels, the efficacy of fear-based messaging in reducing smoking behaviors has been subject to criticism. A 2007 meta-analysis demonstrated that messages emphasizing the severity of threat may be less effective at changing behaviors than messages focusing on susceptibility to threat, suggesting that extremely graphic warning labels are no more effective than labels that simply state the negative consequences of a behavior. Additionally, the study found that warning labels may not be effective among smokers who are not confident that they can quit, leading the authors to recommend exploring other methods of behavior modification.
In many countries, a variety of warnings with graphic, disturbing images of tobacco-related harms (including hematuria and diabetes) are placed prominently on cigarette packages.


== Albania ==
As of 2020, all tobacco products in Albania must have one of the following general warning on the packaging: "Smoking kills - quit now" or "Smoking kills". Additionally, packaging must contain an information message about the product, as follows: "Tobacco contains over 70 substances that cause cancer". The general warning and the information message must occupy 50% of the packaging area of the side on which they are printed. Albania also requires the use of combined warnings that includes the text warning and a colored image, which must cover 65% of the front and back area of the packaging.
Text-based general warning label used on tobacco packages in Albania:


== Argentina ==
General warning before 2013: 

As of 30 January 2013, Argentina passed a law requiring all cigarette packages must include graphical warning labels that show the detrimental effects on the health of long-term smokers, including COVID-19 (added in 2022).


== Australia ==

On 1 December 2012, Australia introduced ground-breaking legislation and the world's toughest tobacco packaging warning messages to date. All marketing and brand devices were removed from the package and replaced with warnings, only the name of the product remains in generic standard sized text. All tobacco products sold, offered for sale or otherwise supplied in Australia were plain-packaged and labelled with new and expanded health warnings.


== Azerbaijan ==
In Azerbaijan, a text-only health warning in the Azeri language, "Smoking harms your health", is required to cover 30% of the front and back of the package. There is no requirement for rotation, and there is only one required health warning. Misleading packaging and labeling, including terms such as "light" and "mild," is prohibited.


== Bangladesh ==
Bangladesh law requires rotating pictorial health warnings to cover at least 50% of the main display areas of all tobacco products. Misleading terms such as "light" and "low tar" are prohibited on tobacco packaging, but other misleading packaging (e.g., colors, numbers, and symbols) is not banned.


== Bolivia ==
Prior to 2020, Bolivia required graphic text and image warnings covering 50% of the pack on the main faces. However, in 2020 Bolivia passed Ley Nº 1280 (Law No. 1280). Ley Nº 1280 requires display graphic health warnings, consisting of both images and text, on the front and back (principal surfaces) of all cigarette packs that occupy 60% of each main face, and are located at the top of the face. The text warnings warn the population of the risks of consuming tobacco products, as well as the risk of exposure to the harmful effects of tobacco smoke and environmental risks. The warnings can only be obscured in the case of soft packs that require a support element. There are currently no required warnings on smokeless tobacco products.


== Bosnia and Herzegovina ==

Bosnia and Herzegovina law requires:
Front of packaging (covers 30% of surface):

Pušenje je štetno za zdravlje (Smoking is harmful to health)
Pušenje ubija (Smoking kills)
Pušenje ozbiljno šteti vama i drugima oko vas (Smoking seriously harms you and others around you)
Back of packaging (covers 50% of surface):

Pušenje uzrokuje rak pluća (Smoking causes lung cancer)
Pušenje uzrokuje srčani udar (Smoking causes heart attacks)
Pušenje uzrokuje moždani udar (Smoking causes strokes)
Pušenje u trudnoći šteti zdravlju Vašeg djeteta (Smoking while pregnant harms your child)
Before 2011, a small warning with the text Pušenje je štetno za zdravlje (Smoking is harmful to health) was printed on the back of cigarette packets.


== Brazil ==

In 2001, Brazil became the second country in the world and the first country in Latin America to adopt mandatory warning images in cigarette packages. Warnings and graphic images illustrating the risks of smoking occupy 100% of the back of cigarette packs. In 2008, the government enacted a third batch of images aimed at younger smokers. The rule was in force for nine years until 2017, when yet another batch of warnings were introduced. They contain images as equally disturbing as the previous ones but also contain subtle messages such as "Você morre" (You die), "Você sofre" (You suffer) and "Você adoece" (You get sick).
Since 2003, the sentence

Este produto contém mais de 4,7 mil substâncias tóxicas, e nicotina que causa dependência física ou psíquica. Não existem níveis seguros para consumo dessas substâncias. (This product contains over 4,700 toxic substances and nicotine, which causes physical or psychological addiction. There are no safe levels for consuming these substances.) is displayed in all packs.


== Brunei ==
The following warnings appear on cigarette packages in Brunei since 2007, based on those of Singapore though displayed in both Malay and English:

MEROKOK MENYEBABKAN PELBAGAI KANSER (Smoking causes various cancers)
MEROKOK MENYEBABKAN STROK DAN PENYAKIT JANTUNG (Smoking causes strokes and heart disease)
MEROKOK MEMBUNUH (Smoking kills)
MEROKOK MEROSAKKAN GIGI AWDA (Smoking damages your teeth)
ASAP TEMBAKAU MEMBAHAYAKAN ANAK DAMIT AWDA (Tobacco smoke harms your baby)
ASAP TEMBAKAU BOLEH MEMBUNUH ANAK DAMIT (Tobacco smoke can kill babies)
MEROKOK MENYEBABKAN KANSER PARU-PARU (Smoking causes lung cancer)
MEROKOK MENYEBABKAN MATI PUCUK (Smoking causes impotence)


== Cambodia ==
In August 2021, the Cambodian Ministry of Health mandated the display of pictorial health warnings, requiring them to cover 55% of the packaging and be updated every two years. The warnings range from a gangrenous foot to premature birth.


== Canada ==
Canada has had three phases of tobacco warning labels. The first set of warnings was introduced in 1989 under the Tobacco Products Control Act, and required warnings to be printed on all tobacco products sold legally in Canada. The set consisted of four messages printed in black-and-white on the front and back of the package, and was expanded in 1994 to include eight messages covering 25% of the front top of the package.

In 2000, the Tobacco Products Information Regulations (TPIR) were passed under the Tobacco Act. The regulations introduced a new set of sixteen warnings. Each warning was printed on the front and back of the package, covering 50% of the surface, with a short explanation and a picture illustrating that particular warning, for example:CIGARETTES CAUSE LUNG CANCER85% of lung cancers are caused by smoking.80% of lung cancer victims die within three years.
accompanied by a picture of cancerous growths inside a human lung.
Additionally, on the inside of the packaging or, for some packets, on a pull-out card, "health information messages" provide answers and explanations regarding common questions and concerns about quitting smoking and smoking-related illnesses. The side of the package also featured information on toxic emissions and constituent levels.
In 2011, the TPIR were replaced for cigarettes and little cigars with the Tobacco Products Labelling Regulations (Cigarettes and Little Cigars). These regulations introduced the third and current set of 16 warnings in Canada. Currently, cigarette and little cigar packages in Canada must bear new graphic warning messages that cover 75% of the front and back of the package. The interior of each package contains 1 of 8 updated health warning messages, all including the number for a national quitline. The side of the package now bears 1 of 4 simplified toxic emission statements. These labels were fully implemented on cigarette and little cigar packages by June 2012 (though the 2000 labels still appear on other tobacco products). Canada also prohibits terms such as "light" and "mild" from appearing on tobacco packaging. The current labels were based on extensive research and a long consultation process that sought to evaluate and improve upon the warnings introduced in 2000.
In accordance with Canadian law regarding products sold legally in Canada, the warnings are provided in both English and French. Imported cigarettes to be sold in Canada which do not have the warnings are affixed with sticker versions when they are sold legally in Canada.
Health Canada considered laws mandating plain packaging, legal tobacco product packaging did still include warning labels, but brand names, fonts, and colors were replaced with simple unadorned text, thereby reducing the impact of tobacco industry marketing techniques.
It was mandated in January 2020.
Canada became the first country in the world to require health warnings on each individual cigarettes and cigars, effective August 1, 2023, to be phased in over time when the regulation is fully in effect by April 2025.


== Chile ==
Since November 2006, all cigarette packages sold in Chile are required to have one of two health warnings, a graphic pictorial warning or a text-only warning. These warnings are replaced with a new set of two warnings each year.


== China ==
Under laws of the People's Republic of China, the Law on Tobacco Monopoly (中华人民共和国烟草专卖法) Chapter 4, Article 18 and Regulations for the Implementation of the Law on Tobacco Monopoly (中华人民共和国烟草专卖法实施条例) Chapter 5 Article 29, cigarettes and cigars sold within Mainland China should indicate the grade of tar content and "Smoking is hazardous to your health" (吸烟有害健康) in the Chinese language on the packs and cartons.
In 2009, the warnings were changed. The warnings, which occupy not less than 30% of the front and back of cigarette packs, show "吸烟有害健康 尽早戒烟有益健康" (Smoking is harmful to your health. Quitting smoking early is good for your health) in the front and "吸烟有害健康 戒烟可减少对健康的危害" (Smoking is harmful to your health. Quitting smoking can reduce health risks) in the back.
The warnings were revised in October 2016 and must occupy at least 35% of the front and back of cigarette packs. The following are the current warnings.

In the front:
本公司提示吸烟有害健康请勿在禁烟场所吸烟
("Our company notes that smoking is harmful to your health. Do not smoke in non-smoking areas" in Chinese)
In the back:
尽早戒烟有益健康戒烟可减少对健康的危害
("Quitting smoking as soon as possible is good for your health. It can also reduce health risks" in Chinese)
or
劝阻青少年吸烟禁止中小学生吸烟
("Dissuade teenagers from smoking. Prohibit primary and middle school students from smoking" in Chinese)


== Timor-Leste ==
Timor-Leste only used a text warning, "FUMA OHO ITA" (Smoking kills), prior to 2018, when new pictorial warnings covering 85% of the front and 100% of the back of packages were implemented.
The warnings currently in use are:

FUMA OHO ITA (Smoking kills), featuring a crucifix made of cigarettes on a pile of human skulls.
FUMA KAUZA IMPOTÉNSIA (Smoking causes impotence)
FUMA PROVOKA MORAS FUAN (Smoking can cause heart attacks)
FUMA KAUZA ABORTU (Smoking causes abortions)
FUMA PROVOKA KANKRU (Smoking can cause cancer)
FUMA KAUZA PULMAUN KRONIKU (Smoking causes chronic lung disease)
Konsulta atu para fuma – Numero telf: 113 (Consultation for quitting smoking – Phone number: 113), accompanying all of these warnings.


== European Union ==

Cigarette packets and other tobacco packaging must include warnings in the same size and format and using the same approved texts (in the appropriate local languages) in all member states of the European Union.
These warnings are displayed in black Helvetica bold on a white background with a thick black border. Ireland once prefaced its warnings with "Irish Government Warning", Latvia with "Veselības ministrija brīdina" (Health Ministry Warning) and Spain with "Las autoridades sanitarias advierten" ("The Health Board Warns"). In member states with more than one official language, the warnings are displayed in all official languages, with the sizes adjusted accordingly (for example in Belgium the messages are written in Dutch, French and German, in Luxembourg in French and German and in Ireland, in Irish and English). All cigarette packets sold in the European Union used to have to display the content of nicotine, tar, and carbon monoxide in the same manner on the side of the packet, this is no longer the case.

In 2003, it was reported that sales of cigarette cases had surged, attributable to the introduction of more prominent warning labels on cigarette packs by an EU directive in January 2003. Alternatively, people choose to hide the warnings using various "funny" stickers, such as "You could be hit by a bus tomorrow."
The most recent EU legislation is the Tobacco Products Directive, which became applicable in EU countries in May 2016.

front, takes up 30%

reverse, takes up 40%


=== Austria and Germany ===

General warnings

Rauchen fügt Ihnen und den Menschen in Ihrer Umgebung erheblichen Schaden zu. – Smoking severely harms you and the people around you.
Additional warnings

Raucher sterben früher – Smokers die younger.
Rauchen führt zur Verstopfung der Arterien und verursacht Herzinfarkte und Schlaganfälle. – Smoking leads to clogging of arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes.
Rauchen verursacht tödlichen Lungenkrebs. – Smoking causes deadly lung cancer.
Rauchen in der Schwangerschaft schadet Ihrem Kind – Smoking while pregnant harms your child.
Schützen Sie Kinder – lassen Sie sie nicht Ihren Tabakrauch einatmen! – Protect children – don't let them inhale your tobacco smoke!
Ihr Arzt oder Apotheker kann Ihnen dabei helfen, das Rauchen aufzugeben. – Your doctor or pharmacist can help you to give up smoking.
Rauchen macht sehr schnell abhängig: Fangen Sie gar nicht erst an! – Smoking makes you addicted very fast: Don't start in the first place!
Wer das Rauchen aufgibt, verringert das Risiko tödlicher Herz- und Lungenerkrankungen – Giving up smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases.
Rauchen kann zu einem langsamen und schmerzhaften Tod führen – Smoking can lead to a slow and painful death.
Rauchen kann zu Durchblutungsstörungen führen und verursacht Impotenz – Smoking can lead to blood circulation disorders and causes impotence.
Rauchen lässt Ihre Haut altern – Smoking ages your skin.
Rauchen kann die Spermatozoen schädigen und schränkt die Fruchtbarkeit ein – Smoking can damage the spermatozoa and decreases your fertility.
Rauch enthält Benzol, Nitrosamine, Formaldehyd und Blausäure – Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamine, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.


=== Belgium ===

Belgium became a party to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control on January 30, 2006. In April 2007, EU-specification text warnings were introduced. Including borders, these messages cover 48% of the front and 63% of the back of cigarette packages, larger than the EU requirements of 35% front and 50% back and amounting to 56% of the overall package, to accommodate Belgium's three official languages of German, French and Dutch.
General warning before 2011:

Since 2011, three different sets of 14 pictorial warnings have been rotated every 12 months.
Belgium prohibits the terms "light" and "mild" from appearing on packages. Additionally, the country requires tar, nicotine, and carbon monoxide emission numbers to appear on the side of packages. These emission numbers are generated using the ISO machine smoking method.


=== Croatia ===
Croatia requires:
Front of packaging (covers 30% of surface):

or

Back of packaging (covers 40% of surface):

Pušači umiru mlađi (Smokers die younger)
Pušenje uzrokuje začepljenje arterija i uzrokuje srčani i moždani udar (Smoking clogs your arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes)
Pušenje uzrokuje smrtonosan rak pluća (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer)
Pušenje u trudnoći šteti vašem djetetu (Smoking while pregnant harms your child)
Zaštitite djecu od udisanja vašeg cigaretnog dima (Protect children from inhaling your cigarette smoke)
Vaš liječnik ili ljekarnik može vam pomoći prestati pušiti (Your doctor or pharmacist can help you stop smoking)
Pušenje stvara izrazitu ovisnost, nemojte ni počinjati (Smoking is highly addictive, don't even start)
Prestanak pušenja umanjuje rizik smrtnih srčanih ili plućnih bolesti (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of deadly heart and lung diseases)
Pušenje može izazvati polaganu i bolnu smrt (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death)
Potražite pomoć za prestanak pušenja /savjetujte se sa svojim liječnikom/ljekarnikom) (Get help to stop smoking /consult with your doctor/pharmacist)
Pušenje može usporiti krvotok i prouzročiti impotenciju (Smoking can slow down blood circulation and cause impotence)
Pušenje uzrokuje starenje kože (Smoking causes aging of the skin)
Pušenje može oštetiti spermu i smanjiti plodnost (Smoking can damage sperm and reduce fertility)
Dim sadrži benzene, nitrozamine, formaldehide i ugljikove cijanide (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanides*)
The last warning contains a mistranslation from Directive 2001/37/EC – "hydrogen" was translated as ugljik (carbon) instead of vodik. It was nevertheless signed into law and started appearing on cigarette packages in March 2009.

2004–2009
These warnings were also simple text warnings.
Front of packaging:

Pušenje šteti Vašem zdravlju (Smoking harms your health)
Back of packaging:

Pušenje uzrokuje rak (Smoking causes cancer)
Pušenje u trudnoći šteti i razvoju djeteta (Smoking while pregnant harms the child's development)
Pušenje uzrokuje srčani i moždani udar (Smoking causes heart attacks and strokes)
Pušenje skraćuje život (Smoking shortens your life)
Side of packaging:

Zabranjuje se prodaja osobama mlađim od 18 godina (Not for sale to persons under the age of 18)
1997–2004
Between 1997 and 2004, a simple text label warning, Pušenje je štetno za zdravlje (Smoking is harmful to health), was used.


=== Cyprus ===
Front side

or

Rear
Οι καπνιστές πεθαίνουν γρήγορα. Τütün içenler genç yaşta ölür. (Smokers die younger.)
Το κάπνισμα αποφράσσει τις αρτηρίες και προκαλεί εμφράγμα και εγκεφαλικά επεισόδια. Τütün damarları tıkar, kalp krizine ve felçlere neden olur. (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes.)
Το κάπνισμα προκαλεί θανατηφόρο καρκίνο των πνευμόνων. Τütün ölümcül akciğer kanserine neden olur. (Smoking causes terminal lung cancer.)
Το κάπνισμα κατά τη διάρκεια της εγκυμοσύνης μπορεί να βλάψει την υγεία του παιδιού σας. Hamile iken tütün içmek bebeğe zarar verir. (Smoking during pregnancy may harm your baby.)
Προστατέψτε τα παιδιά: μην τα αναγκάζετε να αναπνέουν τον καπνό σας. Çocukları koruyun: Dumanınızı onlara solutmayın. (Protect children: don't make them breathe your smoke.)
Ο γιατρός σας ή ο φαρμακοποιός σας μπορούν να σας βοηθήσουν να κόψετε το κάπνισμα. Sağlık kuruluşları tütünü bırakmada size yardımcı olabilir. (Your doctor or your pharmacist can help you stop smoking.)
Το κάπνισμα είναι εξαιρετικά εθιστικό, μην το αρχίσετε. Τütün yüksek derecede bağımlılık yapar, başlamayın. (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start.)
Το σταμάτημα του καπνίσματος μειώνει τον κίνδυνο θανατηφόρων καρδιαγγειακών και πνευμονικών παθήσεων. Τütünü bırakmak ölümcül kalp ve akciğer hastalıkları riskini azaltır. (Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases.)
Το κάπνισμα μπορεί να προκαλέσει αργό και επώδυνο θάνατο. Τütün ağrılı ve yavaş bir ölüme neden olabilir. (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death.)
Το κάπνισμα μπορεί να μειώσει τη ροή του αίματος και να προκαλέσει ανικανότητα. Τütün kan akışını yavaşlatır ve cinsel iktidarsızlığa neden olur. (Smoking may reduce the blood flow and cause impotence.)
Το κάπνισμα προκαλεί γήρανση του δέρματος. Τütün cildin erken yaşlanmasına neden olur. (Smoking causes ageing of the skin.)
Το κάπνισμα μπορεί να βλάψει το σπέρμα και μειώνει τη γονιμότητα. Τütün spermlere zarar vererek doğurganlığı azaltır. (Smoking can damage the sperm and decreases fertility.)
Ο καπνός περιέχει βενζόλιο, νιτροζαμίνες, φορμαλδεΰδη και υδροκυάνιο. Τütün dumanında benzen, nitrosamine, formaldehit ve hidrojensiyanit gibi kanser yapıcı maddeler bulunur. (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.)


=== Czech Republic ===

Kouření vážně škodí Vám i lidem ve Vašem okolí. (Smoking seriously harms you and others around you.)
Kuřáci umírají předčasně. (Smokers die younger.)
Kouření ucpává tepny a způsobuje infarkt a mrtvici. (Smoking clogs the blood vessels and causes heart attacks and strokes.)
Kouření způsobuje smrtelnou rakovinu plic. (Smoking causes deadly lung cancer.)
Kouření je vysoce návykové, nezačínejte s ním. (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start.)
Přestat kouřit, znamená snížit riziko vzniku smrtelných onemocnění srdce a plic. (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of deadly heart and lung diseases.)
Kouření může způsobit pomalou a bolestivou smrt. (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death.)
Kouření způsobuje stárnutí kůže. (Smoking causes ageing of the skin.)
Kouření může poškodit sperma a snižuje plodnost. (Smoking can damage sperm and reduce fertility.)
Kouření může snižovat krevní oběh a způsobuje neplodnost. (Smoking can reduce blood flow and cause impotence.)
Kouř obsahuje benzen, nitrosaminy, formaldehyd a kyanovodík. (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanides.)
Kouření v těhotenství škodí zdraví Vašeho dítěte. (Smoking while pregnant harms your child.)
Chraňte děti: nenuťte je vdechovat Váš kouř. (Protect children: don't make them breathe your smoke.)
Váš lékař nebo lékárník Vám může pomoci přestat s kouřením. (Your doctor or pharmacist can help you stop smoking.)
Získejte pomoc při odvykání kouření. (Seek help to stop smoking.)
As of 7 December 2016, all packages must also include warning images additionally to text warnings. Also cigarette manufacturers are prohibited to display the content of nicotine, tar and carbon monoxide on cigarette packages, because it might mislead customers. The box previously containing the contents of the cigarette was replaced by a warning message: Tabákový kouř obsahuje přes 70 látek, které prokazatelně způsobují rakovinu. (Tobacco smoke contains over 70 substances, which provably cause cancer.)


=== Denmark ===
Warning texts in tobacco products, health warnings, which are reproduced on the packaging of cigarettes and other tobacco products. It is implemented in an effort to strengthen public knowledge about the dangers of smoking.
The order was introduced in Denmark on 31 December 1991. The Order was last revised on 2 October 2003, which also imposed ban on the words "light" and "mild" on Danish cigarette packages, as did European Union countries.
The marking shall appear on one third of the most visible part of the package.

Rygning er yderst skadelig for dig og dine omgivelser (Smoking seriously harms you and others around you)
Rygning nedsætter levealderen (Smokers die younger)
Rygning medfører åreforkalkning og forårsager hjerteanfald og slagtilfælde (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes)
Rygning forårsager dødelig lungekræft (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer)
Hvis du er gravid, skader rygning dit barns sundhed (If you are pregnant, smoking damages your child's health)
Beskyt børn mod tobaksrøg − de har ret til selv at vælge (Protect children from tobacco smoke – they have the right to choose)
Din læge eller din apoteker kan hjælpe dig med at holde op med at ryge (Your doctor or your pharmacist can help you stop smoking)
Rygning er årsag til 9 ud af 10 tilfælde af lungekræft (Smoking causes 9 out of 10 cases of lung cancer)
Rygning er stærkt vanedannende: lad være med at begynde (Smoking is highly addictive, do not start)
Hold op med at ryge, hvis du vil nedsætte risikoen for dødelige hjerte- og lungesygdomme (Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
Rygning kan medføre en langsom og smertefuld død (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death)
Få hjælp til at holde op med at ryge: Tlf.nr. 80313131 (Get help to quit smoking: Telephone number 80313131)
Rygning kan nedsætte blodgennemstrømningen og medfører impotens (Smoking may reduce blood flow and causes impotence)
Rygning ælder huden (Smoking causes aging of the skin)
Rygning kan beskadige sæden og nedsætter frugtbarheden (Smoking can damage sperm and reduce fertility)
Røg indeholder benzen, nitrosaminer, formaldehyd og cyanbrinte (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide)
For smokeless tobacco use above markings does not, whereas the label "Denne tobaksvare kan være sundhedsskadelig og er afhængighedsskabende" (This tobacco product can damage your health and is addictive) is always used for such products.


=== Estonia ===
General warning:

or


=== Finland ===

In Finland, warning signs are written in both Finnish and Swedish languages.

Tupakointi vahingoittaa vakavasti sinua ja ympärilläsi olevia / Rökning skadar allvarligt dig själv och personer i din omgivning (Smoking severely harms you and those around you)
Tupakoivat kuolevat nuorempina / Rökare dör i förtid (Smokers die younger)
Tupakointi tukkii verisuonet sekä aiheuttaa sydänkohtauksia ja aivoveritulppia / Rökning ger förträngningar i blodkärlen och orsakar hjärtinfarkt och stroke (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes)
Tupakointi aiheuttaa keuhkosyöpää, joka johtaa kuolemaan / Rökning orsakar dödlig lungcancer (Smoking causes lung cancer, which leads to death / Smoking causes fatal lung cancer)
Tupakointi raskauden aikana vahingoittaa lastasi / Rökning under graviditeten skadar ditt barn (Smoking during pregnancy harms your child)
Suojele lapsia ― älä pakota heitä hengittämään tupakansavua / Skydda barnen ― låt dem inte andas in din tobaksrök (Protect children ― don't force them to breathe tobacco smoke / Protect children ― don't make them breathe your smoke)
Lääkäriltä tai apteekista saat apua tupakoinnin lopettamiseen / Din läkare eller ditt apotek kan hjälpa dig att sluta röka (You receive help to stop smoking from a doctor or a pharmacy / Your doctor or your pharmacist can help you stop smoking)
Tupakointi aiheuttaa voimakasta riippuvuutta. Älä aloita / Rökning är mycket beroendeframkallande. Börja inte rök (Smoking causes powerful addiction. Don't start / Smoking is highly addictive. Don't start)
Lopettamalla tupakoinnin vähennät vaaraa sairastua kuolemaan johtaviin sydän- ja keuhkosairauksiin / Om du slutar röka löper du mindre risk att få dödliga hjärt- och lungsjukdomar (By stopping smoking you reduce the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases / Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
Tupakointi voi aiheuttaa hitaan ja tuskallisen kuoleman / Rökning kan leda till en långsam och smärtsam död (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death)
Pyydä apua tupakoinnin lopettamiseen: puh. 0800 148 484 / Sök hjälp för att sluta röka: tfn 0800 148 484 (Request help to stop smoking: call 0800 148 484 / Get help to stop smoking: call 0800 148 484)
Tupakointi aiheuttaa impotenssia ja voi heikentää verenkiertoa / Rökning kan försämra blodflödet och orsakar impotens (Smoking causes impotence and may reduce the blood flow / Smoking may reduce the blood flow and cause impotence)
Tupakointi vanhentaa ihoa / Rökning får din hy att åldras (Smoking ages the skin / Smoking causes ageing of the skin)
Tupakointi voi vahingoittaa siittiöitä ja vähentää hedelmällisyyttä / Rökning kan skada sperman och minskar fruktsamheten (Smoking can damage the sperm and decrease fertility / Smoking can damage the sperm and decreases fertility)
Savu sisältää bentseeniä, nitrosamiineja, formaldehydiä ja vetysyanidia / Rök innehåller bensen, nitrosaminer, formaldehyd och cyanväte (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide)


=== France ===

Before January 2017, France used regular EU warnings for tobacco products.

Front of packaging (covers 30% of surface)

or

Rear (covers 40% of surface, similar design)
Les fumeurs meurent prématurément. (Smokers die prematurely.)
Fumer bouche les artères et provoque des crises cardiaques et des attaques cérébrales. (Smoking clogs arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes.)
Fumer provoque le cancer mortel du poumon. (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer.)
Fumer pendant la grossesse nuit à la santé de votre enfant. (Smoking during pregnancy harms your child's health.)
Protégez les enfants: ne leur faites pas respirer votre fumée. (Protect your children: don't make them breathe your smoke.)
Votre médecin ou votre pharmacien peuvent vous aider à arrêter de fumer. (Your doctor or pharmacist can help you quit smoking.)
Fumer crée une forte dépendance, ne commencez pas. (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start.)
Arrêter de fumer réduit les risques de maladies cardiaques et pulmonaires mortelles. (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases.)
Fumer peut entraîner une mort lente et douloureuse. (Smoking can result in a slow and painful death.)
Faites-vous aider pour arrêter de fumer: téléphonez au 0 825 309 310 (0,15 euro/min) (Help yourself quit smoking: call 0 825 309 310)
Fumer peut diminuer l'afflux sanguin et provoque l'impuissance. (Smoking can reduce the blood flow and causes impotence.)
Fumer peut nuire aux spermatozoïdes et réduit la fertilité. (Smoking damages sperm and reduces fertility.)
La fumée contient du benzène, des nitrosamines, du formaldéhyde et du cyanure d'hydrogène. (Cigarette smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.)
Left or right side of packaging
Components percentages (15% of surface, small prints): Tobacco – Cigarette paper – Flavor and texture agents
ISO yields of toxics in mg/cigarette (in prominent black on white square and bold letters): Tar – Nicotin – Carbon monoxide
Other side of packaging
Country of manufacturing, name of manufacturer, quantity
Product identifier (EAN-7 bar code)
Other characteristics
Small print: "Vente en France 01" (sales in France)
Recyclable logo (for the packaging)
Words forbidden in the displayed product name: light, ultra-light, légere, or any indication that may indicate that this is a minor drug with low impact (These branding words have been replaced by various colour names)
Plain packaging has been regulated since January 2017.


=== Greece ===

Το κάπνισμα μπορεί να σκοτώσει. (Smoking can kill)
Το κάπνισμα βλάπτει σοβαρά τον καπνιστή και τους γύρω του. (Smoking seriously harms the smoker and the ones around them.)
Το κάπνισμα βλάπτει σοβαρά εσάς και τους γύρω σας. (Smoking seriously harms you and the ones around you.)
Οι καπνιστές πεθαίνουν πρόωρα. (Smokers die prematurely.)
Το κάπνισμα αποφράσσει τις αρτηρίες και προκαλεί εμφράγματα και εγκεφαλικά επεισόδια. (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes.)
Το κάπνισμα προκαλεί θανατηφόρο καρκίνο των πνευμόνων. (Smoking causes fatal lung cancers.)
Το κάπνισμα κατά τη διάρκεια της εγκυμοσύνης μπορεί να βλάπτει την υγεία του παιδιού σας. (Smoking during pregnancy can harm the health of your baby.)
Προστατέψτε τα παιδιά: μην τα αναγκάζετε να αναπνέουν τον καπνό σας. (Protect children: do not force them to breathe in your smoke.)
Ο γιατρός σας ή ο φαρμακοποιός σας μπορεί να σας βοηθήσει να κόψετε το κάπνισμα. (Your physician or pharmacist can assist you in quitting smoking.)
Το κάπνισμα είναι εξαιρετικά εθιστικό, μην το αρχίσετε. (Smoking is very addictive; don't start with it)
Το σταμάτημα του καπνίσματος μειώνει τον κίνδυνο θανατηφόρων καρδιαγγειακών και πνευμονικών παθήσεων. (Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
Το κάπνισμα μπορεί να προκαλέσει αργό και επώδυνο θάνατο. (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death.)
Ζητήστε βοήθεια για να σταματήσετε το κάπνισμα: συμβουλευτείτε το γιατρό σας. (Seek help to quit smoking: consult your doctor.)
Το κάπνισμα μπορεί να μειώσει τη ροή του αίματος και να προκαλέσει ανικανότητα. (Smoking may reduce blood circulation and cause impotence)
Το κάπνισμα προκαλεί γήρανση του δέρματος. (Smoking causes premature skin aging.)
Το κάπνισμα μπορεί να βλάψει το σπέρμα και μειώνει τη γονιμότητα. (Smoking damages sperm and reduces fertility.)
Ο καπνός περιέχει βενζόλιο, νιτροζαμίνες, φορμαλδεΰδη και υδροκυάνιο. (Cigarette smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.)


=== Hungary ===

A dohányosok korábban halnak. (Smokers die younger.)
A dohányzás elzárja az artériákat, szívrohamot és agyvérzést okoz. (Smoking clogs arteries and causes heart diseases and strokes.)
A dohányzás halálos tüdőrákot okoz. (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer.)
A terhes nők dohányzása károsítja a magzat egészségét. (Smoking during pregnancy harms the baby.)
Védje a gyermekeket: ne tegye ki őket a dohányfüst belélegzése veszélyének. (Protect the kids, don't smoke in their presence.)
Az orvosok és a gyógyszerészek segíthetnek a leszokásban. (Your doctor or your pharmacist may help you quit smoking.)
A dohányzásról nagyon nehéz leszokni, ezért ne szokjon rá. (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start.)
A dohányzás abbahagyása csökkenti a halálos szív- és tüdőbetegségek kockázatát. (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of deadly cardiovascular and lung diseases.)
A dohányzás lassú és fájdalmas halálhoz vezet. (Smoking can cause a long and painful death.)
Kérjen segítséget a leszokáshoz (telefon/levélcím/Internet-cím) kérdezze meg háziorvosát/gyógyszerészét. (Specialists in the medical profession may help you quit smoking.)
A dohányzás lassíthatja a vér áramlását, és impotenciát okozhat. (Smoking may reduce blood circulation and cause impotency.)
A dohányzás öregíti a bőrt. (Smoking ages the skin.)
A dohányzás károsítja a spermákat és gyengíti a megtermékenyítő képességet. (Smoking may damage sperm and diminish fertility.)
A füst benzolt, nitrozamint, formaldehidet és hidrogén-cianidot tartalmaz. (Cigarettes contain benzene, nistrosamine, formaldehyde and hydrocyanic acid.)


=== Ireland ===

Ireland currently follows EU standards (see above), but previously ran its own scheme, where one of 8 messages was placed on the pack, as defined in SI 326/1991.
After a High Court settlement in January 2008, it was accepted that the warnings on tobacco products must appear in both official languages of the state. As a result, the European Communities (Manufacture, Presentation 
and Sale of Tobacco Products) (Amendment) Regulations 2008 were put in place. This provides that tobacco products going to market after 30 September 2008 must carry warnings in Irish and English. A year-long transition period applied to products which were on the market prior to 1 October 2008, which may have been sold until 1 October 2009.
Each packet of tobacco products must carry:

One of the following general warnings (in both the Irish and English languages) which must cover at least 32% of the external side.
Toradh caithimh tobac – bás – Smoking kills
Déanann caitheamh tobac díobháil thromchúiseach duit agus do na daoine mórthimpeall ort – Smoking seriously harms you and others around you
and one of the following additional warnings (in both the Irish and English languages) which must cover at least 45% of the external side.
Giorrú saoil tobac a chaitheamh – Smokers die younger
Nuair a chaitear tobac, tachtar na hartairí agus is é cúis le taomanna croí agus strócanna – Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes
Caitheamh tobac is cúis le hailse scamhóg mharfach – Smoking causes fatal lung cancer
Má chaitheann tú tobac le linn toirchis, déantar díobháil don leanbán – Smoking when pregnant harms your baby
Cosain leanaí: ná cuir iallach orthu do chuid deataigh an análú – Protect children: don't make them breathe your smoke
Féadann do dhochtúir nó do chógaiseoir cabhrú leat éirí as caitheamh tobac Your doctor or your pharmacist can help you stop smoking
Is éasca a bheith tugtha do chaitheamh tobac, ná tosaigh leis – Smoking is highly addictive, don't start
Má éiríonn tú as tobac a chaitheamh laghdaítear an riosca de ghalair mharfacha chroí agus scamhóg – Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases
Féadann caitheamh tobac bheith ina chúis le bás mall pianmhar – Smoking can cause a slow and painful death
Faigh cúnamh chun éirí as caitheamh tobac: Íosghlao Stoplíne 1850 201 203 – Get help to stop smoking: Callsave Quitline 1850 201 203
Féadfaidh caitheamh tobac imshruthúfola a laghdú agus bheith ina chúis le héagumas – Smoking may reduce the blood flow and cause impotence
Caitheamh tobac is cúis le críonadh craicinn – Smoking causes ageing of the skin
Féadann caitheamh tobac dochar a dhéanamh don speirm agus laghdaíonn sé torthúlacht – Smoking can damage the sperm and decreases fertility
Cuimsíonn deatach beinséin, nítreasaimíní, formaildéad agus ciainíd hidrigine – Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide
In the case of Smokeless Tobacco Products, only the following warning must be displayed:
Féadann an táirge tobac seo dochar a dhéanamh do shláinte agus is táirge andúile é – This tobacco product can damage your health and is addictive


=== Italy ===

Il fumo uccide / Il fumo può uccidere. (Smoking kills / Smoking can kill.)
Il fumo danneggia gravemente te e chi ti sta intorno. (Smoking heavily damages you and those around you.)
I fumatori muoiono prima. (Smokers die younger.)
Il fumo ostruisce le arterie e provoca infarti e ictus. (Smoking clogs arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes.)
Il fumo provoca cancro mortale ai polmoni. (Smoking causes deadly lung cancer.)
Fumare in gravidanza fa male al bambino. (Smoking during pregnancy harms your baby.)
Proteggi i bambini, non fumare in loro presenza. (Protect children, don't smoke in their presence.)
Il medico o il tuo farmacista possono aiutarti a smettere di fumare. (A doctor or pharmacist can help you quit smoking.)
Specialisti del settore medico possono aiutarti a smettere di fumare. (Specialists in the medical sector can help you quit smoking.)
Il fumo crea un'elevata dipendenza, non iniziare. (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start.)
Smettere di fumare riduce il rischio di malattie cardiovascolari e polmonari mortali. (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of deadly cardiovascular and lung diseases.)
Il fumo può provocare una morte lenta e dolorosa. (Smoking can cause a long and painful death.)
Il fumo provoca il cancro della cavità orale. (Smoking causes oral cavities and cancer.)
Fatti aiutare a smettere di fumare. (Get help to quit smoking.)
Il fumo può ridurre la circolazione sanguigna e causa impotenza. (Smoking may reduce blood circulation and causes impotence.)
Il fumo invecchia la pelle. (Smoking ages the skin.)
Il fumo può danneggiare lo sperma e diminuisce la fertilità. (Smoking may damage sperm and diminishes fertility.)
Il fumo contiene benzene, nitrosammine, formaldeide e acido cianidrico. (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrocyanic acid.)
Il fumo può portare alla cecità. (Smoking can lead to blindness.)
Other text is sometimes placed in the packets; for example, some packets contain leaflets which have all the above warnings written on them, with more detailed explanations and reasons to give up, and advice from Philip Morris.


=== Latvia ===

Deviņi no desmit plaušu vēža slimniekiem ir smēķētāji. (Smoking causes 9 out of 10 lung cancers )
Smēķēšana izraisa mutes un rīkles vēzi. (Smoking causes mouth and throat cancer)
Smēķēšana nopietni kaitē plaušām. (Smoking damages your lungs)
Smēķēšana izraisa sirdslēkmes. (Smoking causes heart attacks)
Smēķēšana izraisa insultu un invaliditāti. (Smoking causes strokes and disability)
Smēķēšana izraisa artēriju nosprostošanos. (Smoking clogs your arteries )
Smēķēšana palielina risku kļūt aklam. (Smoking increases the risk of blindness )
Smēķēšana izraisa zobu bojājumus un smaganu saslimšanas. (Smoking can cause teeth damages and illnesses of gums)
Smēķēšana var nogalināt jūsu vēl nedzimušo bērnu. (Smoking can kill your unborn child )
Cigarešu dūmi kaitē jūsu bērniem, ģimenei un draugiem. (Your smoke harms your children, family and friends )
Ja smēķējat jūs, paaugstinās risks, ka smēķēs arī jūsu bērni. (Smokers' children are more likely to start smoking)
Atmetiet tagad – tuviniekiem jūs esat vajadzīgs dzīvs. ( Quit smoking now – stay alive for those close to you)
Smēķēšana samazina auglību. (Smoking reduces fertility)
Smēķēšana palielina impotences risku. (Smoking increases the risk of impotence)


=== Lithuania ===
General warning:

or


=== Malta ===
Twissija mid-Dipartiment tas-Saħħa – Periklu: – (Warning from the Health Department – Danger:)
It-tipjip joqtol – (Smoking kills)
Min ipejjep imut żgħir – (Smokers die younger)
It-tipjip isodd l-arterji u jġib l-attakki tal-qalb u l-puplesiji – (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes)
It-tipjip jagħmel kanċer fil-pulmun – (Smoking causes fatal lung cancers)
Jekk tpejjep waqt it-tqala tagħmel ħsara lit-tarbija tiegħek – (Smoking when pregnant harms your baby)
Ipproteġi lit-tfal: iġġelhomx jibilgħu d-duħħan tas-sigaretti tiegħek – (Protect children: don't make them breathe your smoke)
It-tabib Jew l-ispiżjar jgħinuk biex tieqaf tpejjep – (Your doctor and your pharmacist can help you stop smoking)
It-tipjip huwa vizzju, tibdiex tpejjep – (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start)
Jekk tieqaf tpejjep tnaqas ir-riskju ta' attakki tal-qalb u mard tal-pulmun – (Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
It-tipjip jista' jwassal għal agunija fit-tul u ħafna uġiegħ – (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death)
Itlob l-għajnuna biex tieqaf tpejjep – 21231247 – (Get help to stop smoking – 21231247)
It-tipjip inaqqas iċ-ċirkulazzjoni tad-demm u jista' jwassal għall-impotenza – (Smoking may reduce the blood flow and causes impotence)
It-tipjip ixejjħek – (Smoking causes aging of the skin)
It-tipjip jista' jagħmel ħsara lill-isperma u jnaqqas il-fertilità – (Smoking can damage the sperm and decrease fertility)
Id-duħħan fih il-benżene, in-nitrosamini, il-formaldehyde, u l-idroġen cyanide – (Smokes contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide)


=== Netherlands ===

Stop met roken, blijf leven voor je vrienden en familie (Quit smoking, stay alive for your family and friends)
Roken is dodelijk (Smoking is deadly)
Roken veroorzaakt impotentie (Smoking causes impotence)
Roken veroorzaakt dodelijke longkanker (Smoking causes deadly lung cancer)
Tabaksrook bevat benzeen, nitrosaminen, formaldehyde en waterstofcyanide (Tobacco smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogencyanide)
Uw arts of apotheker kan u helpen te stoppen met roken (Your physician or pharmacist can help you to quit smoking)
Rokers sterven jonger (Smokers die younger)
Roken veroorzaakt verstopping van de bloedvaten, hartaanvallen en beroertes (Smoking causes clogging of the blood vessels, heart attacks and strokes)
Roken tijdens de zwangerschap is slecht voor uw baby (Smoking during pregnancy harms your baby)
Roken kan uw ongeboren kind doden (Smoking can kill your unborn child)
Bescherm kinderen: laat hen niet uw rook inademen (Protect children: don't let them inhale your smoke)
Roken werkt zeer verslavend; begin er niet mee (Smoking is very addictive; prevent yourself from starting)
Stoppen met roken vermindert het risico op dodelijke hart- en longziekten (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
Roken kan leiden tot een langzame, pijnlijke dood (Smoking may result in a slow, painful death)
Roken kan de bloedsomloop verminderen en veroorzaakt impotentie (Smoking may reduce the blood flow and causes impotence)
Roken veroudert uw huid (Smoking ages your skin)
Roken kan het sperma beschadigen en vermindert de vruchtbaarheid (Smoking can damage the sperm and reduces fertility)
Roken brengt u en anderen rondom u ernstige schade toe (Smoking causes serious damage to you and those around you)
Uw arts of apotheker kan u helpen te stoppen met roken, bel nu 0800-55532340 (Your physician or pharmacist can help you to quit smoking, call 0800-555532340 now.)


=== Poland ===

Front of packaging (covers 30% of surface):

or

There are also warnings on the back of every packet:

Palacze tytoniu umierają młodziej (Smokers die younger)
Dzieci palaczy częściej zostają palaczami (Children of smokers become smokers by themselves more often)
Palenie tytoniu zamyka naczynia krwionośne i jest przyczyną zawałów serca i udarów mózgu (Smoking causes clogging of the blood vessels, heart attacks and strokes)
Palenie tytoniu powoduje śmiertelnego raka płuc (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer)
Palenie tytoniu w czasie ciąży szkodzi Twojemu dziecku (Smoking while pregnant harms your baby)
Chrońcie dzieci – nie zmuszajcie ich do wdychania dymu tytoniowego (Protect children: don't let them breath your smoke)
Twój lekarz lub farmaceuta pomoże Ci rzucić palenie (Your doctor or your pharmacist can help you quit smoking)
Palenie tytoniu silnie uzależnia – nie zaczynaj palić (Smoking is highly addictive; do not start smoking)
Zaprzestanie palenia zmniejsza ryzyko groźnych chorób serca i płuc (Stopping smoking reduces the risk of serious heart and lung disease)
Palenie tytoniu może spowodować powolną i bolesną śmierć (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death)
Dzwoniąc pod nr telefonu 0801108108, uzyskasz pomoc w rzuceniu palenia (Get help to quit smoking by calling 0801108108)
Palenie tytoniu może zmniejszyć przepływ krwi i powodować impotencję (Smoking can reduce blood flow and cause impotence)
Palenie tytoniu przyśpiesza starzenie się skóry (Smoking accelerates skin aging)
Palenie tytoniu może uszkodzić nasienie i zmniejszać płodność (Smoking can damage sperm and reduce fertility)
Dym tytoniowy zawiera benzen, nitrozoaminy, formaldehyd i cyjanowodór (Tobacco smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide)


=== Portugal ===

Fumar mata. (Smoking kills)
Fumar provoca o cancro pulmonar mortal. (Smoking causes deadly lung cancer)
Fumar causa elevada dependência. Não comece a fumar. (Smoking causes serious addiction. Don't start smoking.)
Fumar provoca o envelhecimento da pele. (Smoking causes skin aging)
Fumar prejudica gravemente a sua saúde e a dos que o rodeiam. (Smoking seriously harms your health and the health of those around you)
Se está grávida: fumar prejudica a saúde do seu filho. (If you're pregnant: Smoking harms your child's health)
Os fumadores morrem prematuramente. (Smokers die prematurely)
Fumar bloqueia as artérias e provoca ataques cardíacos e AVC. (Smoking clogs your arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes)
Fumar pode reduzir o fluxo de sangue e provoca impotência. (Smoking might reduce blood flow and causes impotence)
Deixar de fumar reduz os riscos de doenças cardiovasculares e pulmonares mortais. (Quitting reduces the risks of deadly cardiovascular and pulmonar diseases)


=== Romania ===

General warning (on the front of cigarette packages, covering at least 40% of the area):

Fumatul ucide (Smoking kills)
Fumatul poate să ucidă (Smoking can kill)
Fumatul dăunează grav sănătăţii dumneavoastră şi a celor din jur (Smoking seriously harms you and those around);
Additional warnings (on the back of cigarette packages, covering at least 50% of the area):

Fumătorii mor mai tineri. (Smokers die younger.)
Fumatul blochează circulaţia sângelui în artere, provoacă infarct miocardic şi accident vascular cerebral. (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes)
Fumatul provoacă cancer pulmonar, care este letal. (Smoking causes lung cancer, which is lethal.)
Fumatul în timpul sarcinii daunează copilului dumneavoastră. (Smoking when pregnant harms your baby.)
Protejaţi copiii: nu-i lăsaţi să respire fumul dumneavoastră! (Protect children: don't let them breathe your smoke!)
Doctorul sau farmacistul dumneavoastră vă poate ajuta să vă lăsaţi de fumat. (Your doctor or pharmacist can help you quit smoking)
Fumatul dă dependenţă, nu începeţi să fumaţi! (Smoking is addictive, don't start smoking!)
Oprirea fumatului scade riscul de îmbolnăviri cardiace sau pulmonare fatale. (Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
Fumatul poate provoca o moarte lentă şi dureroasă. (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death.)
Primiţi ajutorul pentru renunţare la fumat: (...telefon/adresă postală/adresă de Internet/consultaţi doctorul dumneavoastră/farmacistul...). (Get help to stop smoking: telephone/postal address/Internet address/consult your doctor/pharmacist...)
Fumatul încetineşte circulaţia sângelui şi provoacă impotenţă. (Smoking reduces blood circulation and causes impotence)
Fumatul provoacă îmbătrânirea tenului (pielii). (Smoking causes skin aging.)
Fumatul poate dăuna calităţii spermei şi scade fertilitatea. (Smoking can affect sperm quality and decreases fertility.)
Fumul de ţigară conţine benzeni, nitrozamine, formaldehide şi cianuri. (Cigarette smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.)


=== Slovenia ===
Front of packaging (covers 30% of surface)

or

Rear of packaging (covers 40% of surface)
Kadilci umirajo mlajši. (Smokers die younger.)
Kajenje maši žile in povzroča srčni infarkt in možgansko kap. (Smoking clogs arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes.)
Kajenje povzroča smrt zaradi pljučnega raka. (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer.)
Kajenje med nosečnostjo škoduje vašemu otroku. (Smoking during pregnancy harms your child.)
Varujte otroke pred vdihavanjem vašega cigaretnega dima. (Protect your children from breathing your cigarette smoke.)
Vaš zdravnik ali farmacevt vam lahko pomaga opustiti kajenje. (Your doctor or pharmacist can help you quit smoking.)
Kajenje povzroča hudo zasvojenost, zato ne začnite kaditi. (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start.)
Opustitev kajenja zmanjša tveganje za smrt zaradi bolezni srca in pljuč. (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases.)
Kajenje lahko povzroči počasno in boleče umiranje. (Smoking can result in a slow and painful death.)
Poiščite pomoč pri opuščanju kajenja: posvetujte se z zdravnikom. (Seek help to quit smoking: consult your doctor.)
Kajenje lahko zmanjša pretok krvi in povzroči impotenco. (Smoking can reduce blood circulation and cause impotence.)
Kajenje povzroča staranje kože. (Smoking causes ageing of the skin.)
Kajenje lahko škoduje spermi in zmanjša plodnost. (Smoking damages sperm and reduces fertility.)
Cigaretni dim vsebuje benzen, nitrosamine, formaldehid in vodikov cianid. (Cigarette smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.)


=== Spain ===
In Spain, cigarette packages are preceded by warnings on both sides of the package marked "Las Autoridades Sanitarias advierten" (Health authorities warn), written in black and white above the black part of the standard warning.

or

Front of cigarette packages

Fumar puede matar (Smoking can kill) (changed in 2010 to "Fumar mata" <Smoking kills>)
Fumar perjudica gravemente su salud y la de los que están a su alrededor (Smoking seriously harms to your health and that of others)
Back of cigarette packages

Fumar acorta la vida (Smoking shortens [your] life)
Fumar provoca cáncer mortal de pulmón (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer)
El tabaco es muy adictivo: no empiece a fumar (Tobacco is very addictive, do not start)
Fumar obstruye las arterias y provoca cardiopatías y accidentes cerebrovasculares (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart disease and stroke)
Fumar provoca el envejecimiento de la piel (Smoking causes skin aging)
Ayuda para dejar de fumar: consulte a su médico o farmacéutico (Help to stop smoking: consult your doctor or pharmacist)
Fumar puede reducir el flujo sanguíneo y provoca impotencia (Smoking may reduce blood flow and causes impotence)


=== Sweden ===

General warnings on all cigarette packagings in Sweden have been in force since 1977.

Front of cigarette packages

Rökning dödar. (Smoking kills.)
Tobak skadar din hälsa allvarligt. (Tobacco causes serious harm to your health.)
Rökning under graviditet kan skada ditt foster. (Smoking while pregnant may harm your fetus.)
Rökning kan leda till en långsam och smärtsam död. (Smoking can lead to a slow and painful death.)
Rökning kan försämra blodflödet och orsakar impotens. (Smoking can impair the blood flow and causes impotence.)
Rökning skadar allvarligt dig själv och personer i din omgivning. (Smoking seriously hurts you and people around you.)
Rök innehåller bensen, nitrosaminer, formaldehyd och cyanväte. (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.)
Skydda barnen. Låt dem inte andas in din tobaksrök. (Protect the children. Don't let them inhale your tobacco smoke.)
Back of cigarette packages

Rökning kan skada sperman och minskar fruktsamheten. (Smoking may damage the sperm and reduce fertility.)
Rökning är mycket beroendeframkallande. Börja inte röka (Smoking is very addictive. Do not start smoking.)
Rear side of snus packaging

Denna tobaksvara kan skada din hälsa och är beroendeframkallande. (This tobacco product might cause harm to your health and is addictive.)


== Georgia ==
General warning:


== Ghana ==
Warnings in Ghana are compliant with the EU's legislations, as follows:
Packaging 1 (same as in the newer UK packaging):

Smoking seriously harms you and others around you
Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases
Packaging 2 (same as in the older UK packaging):

Smoking causes cancer
Smoking damages the health of those around you
Packaging 3 (same as in the older UK packaging):

Smoking causes fatal diseases
Smokers die younger


== Honduras ==
In Honduras, warnings are stipulated by the Honduran Institute for the Prevention of Alcoholism, Drug Addiction and Drug Dependence (IHADFA).


== Hong Kong ==

In 1983, the Smoking (Public Health) Ordinance dictated tobacco companies to print an official warning on cigarette packages by Hong Kong Government. Under Hong Kong Law, Chap 371B Smoking (Public Health) (Notices) Order, packaging must indicate the amount of nicotine and tar that is present in cigarette boxes in addition to graphics depicting different health problems caused by smoking in the size and ratio as prescribed by law. The warnings are to be published in both official languages, Traditional Chinese and English.
Every warning begins with the phrase '香港特區政府忠告市民/HKSAR GOVERNMENT WARNING' and then one of the following in all caps:

吸煙引致肺癌/Smoking causes lung cancer
吸煙足以致命/Smoking kills
吸煙禍及家人/Smoking harms your family
吸煙引致末梢血管疾病/Smoking causes peripheral vascular diseases
吸煙可引致陽萎/Smoking may cause impotence
吸煙可加速皮膚老化/Smoking can accelerate aging of the skin
In addition, any print advertisement must give minimum 85% coverage of the following warnings:
HKSAR GOVERNMENT HEALTH WARNING

January - February SMOKING KILLS
March - April SMOKING CAUSES CANCER
May - June SMOKING CAUSES HEART DISEASE
July - August SMOKING CAUSES LUNG CANCER
September - October SMOKING CAUSES RESPIRATORY DISEASES
November - December SMOKING HARMS YOUR CHILDREN
In 2018, a new batch of warnings were introduced, consisting of the following warnings that cover 85% of packs:


== Iceland ==
All cigarette packets and other tobacco packaging in Iceland must include warnings in the same size and format as in the European Union and using the same approved texts in Icelandic.
General warning:

These warnings are also used:

Læknirinn þinn eða lyfjafræðingur geta hjálpað þér að hætta að reykja. (Your doctor or pharmacist can help you quit smoking)
Reykingar valda krabbameini. (Smoking causes cancer)
Reykingar eru mjög skaðlegar fyrir þig og þá sem eru nálægt þér. (Smoking is very harmful to you and those close to you)
Reykingar stífla slagæðar og valda kransæðastíflu og heilablóðfalli. (Smoking blocks your arteries and causes coronary artery disease and strokes)
Reykingar valda banvænu krabbameini í lungum. (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer)
Reykingar á meðgöngu skaða barnið þitt. (Smoking during pregnancy harms your child)
Verndaðu börnin – Láttu þau ekki anda að sér tókbaksreyk. (Protect children – Don't let them inhale tobacco smoke)


== India ==
Cigarette packets sold in India are required to carry graphical and textual health warnings. The warning must cover at least 85% of the surface of the pack, of which 60% must be pictorial and the remaining 25% contains textual warnings in English, Hindi or any other Indian language.
In 2003, India ratified the World Health Organisation's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, which includes a recommendation for large, clear health warnings on tobacco packages. However, there was a delay in implementing graphic warning labels.
Until 2008, cigarette packets sold in India were required to carry a written warning on the front of the packet with the text CIGARETTE SMOKING IS INJURIOUS TO HEALTH in English. Paan, gutkha and tobacco packets carried the warning TOBACCO IS INJURIOUS TO HEALTH in Hindi and English. The law later changed. According to the new law, cigarette packets were required to carry pictorial warnings of a skull or scorpion along with the text SMOKING KILLS and TOBACCO CAUSES MOUTH CANCER in both Hindi and English.
The Cigarette and Other Tobacco Products (Packaging and Labelling) Rules 2008 requiring graphic health warnings came into force on 31 May 2008. Under the law, all tobacco products were required to display graphic pictures, such as pictures of diseased lungs, and the text SMOKING KILLS or TOBACCO KILLS in English, covering at least 40% of the front of the pack, and retailers must display the cigarette packs in such a way that the pictures on pack are clearly visible. In January 2012, controversy arose when it was discovered that an image of former English footballer John Terry was used on a warning label.
On 15 October 2014, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan announced that only 15% of the surface of a pack of cigarettes could contain branding, and that the rest must be used for graphic and text health warnings. The Union Ministry of Health amended the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Packaging and Labelling) Rules, 2008 to enforce the changes effective from 1 April 2015.
However, the government decision to increase pictorial warnings on tobacco packets from 1 April was put on hold indefinitely, following the recommendations of a Parliamentary committee, which reportedly did not speak to health experts but only to tobacco lobby representatives. On 5 April 2016, the health ministry ordered government agencies to enforce this new rule.
Following the intervention by the Parliamentary committee, NGO Health of Millions, represented by Prashant Bhushan, filed a petition in the Supreme Court of India, which asked the government to stop selling of loose cigarettes and publish bigger health warnings on tobacco packs.


== Indonesia ==
In Indonesia, tobacco warnings are not just placed on packages but also on cigarette advertisements, which are not banned in few countries including Indonesia.


=== Until December 31, 1999 ===


=== January 2000–December 2013 ===
With the enforcement of Indonesian Government Regulation No. 19 (2003), a new warning was implemented:

The last recorded usage of this warning in TV advertisements was an Esse Mild advertisement from late February 2014.


=== December 2013–December 2018 ===

With the enforcement of the Indonesian Government Regulation No. 109 (2012), all tobacco products/cigarette packaging and advertisement should include warning images and age restriction (18+). Graphic warnings must cover 40% of cigarette packages. After the introduction of graphic images in Indonesian cigarette packaging, the branding of cigarettes as "light", "mild", "filter", etc. is forbidden, except for brands that already use some words above such as L.A. Lights, A Mild or Dunhill Filter. However, the last advertisement to use this warning was a 2021 Djarum Super advertisement, before it subsequently used the 2018 warning.

Other alternatives:

PERINGATAN: MEROKOK SEBABKAN KANKER MULUT (Warning: Smoking causes mouth cancer)
PERINGATAN: MEROKOK SEBABKAN KANKER TENGGOROKAN (Warning: Smoking causes throat cancer)
PERINGATAN: MEROKOK DEKAT ANAK BERBAHAYA BAGI MEREKA (Warning: Smoking endangers children near you)
PERINGATAN: MEROKOK SEBABKAN KANKER PARU-PARU DAN BRONKITIS KRONIS (Warning: Smoking causes lung cancer and chronic bronchitis)
These warnings below appear on the side of cigarette packaging:

DILARANG MENJUAL/MEMBERI PADA ANAK USIA DI BAWAH 18 TAHUN DAN PEREMPUAN HAMIL (Do not sell or give [this product] to children under 18 years old and pregnant women)
Optional: TIDAK ADA BATAS AMAN! MENGANDUNG LEBIH DARI 4.000 ZAT KIMIA BERBAHAYA, 43 ZAT PENYEBAB KANKER (There is no safe limit! Contains more than 4,000 hazardous chemicals and 43 carcinogens)


=== January 2019–September 2024 ===

After it was revealed that the pictorial warnings used in Indonesia originally came from the 2005 warnings of Thailand, on 31 May 2018, the Ministry of Health launched new pictorial health warnings, of which two depict Indonesian smokers and one depicts a smoker from Venezuela.

Other alternatives:

PERINGATAN: MEROKOK SEBABKAN KANKER MULUT (Warning: Smoking causes mouth cancer)
PERINGATAN: MEROKOK SEBABKAN KANKER PARU (Warning: Smoking causes lung cancer)
PERINGATAN: ROKOK MERENGGUT KEBAHAGIAAN SAYA SATU PERSATU (Warning: One by one, cigarettes took my happiness away)
PERINGATAN: MEROKOK SEBABKAN KANKER TENGGOROKAN (Warning: Smoking causes throat cancer)
LAYANAN BERHENTI MEROKOK: 0800-177-6565 (Smoking quitline: 0800-177-6565)
DILARANG MENJUAL/MEMBERI PADA ANAK USIA DI BAWAH 18 TAHUN DAN PEREMPUAN HAMIL (Do not sell or give [this product] to children under 18 years old and pregnant women) (from January 2019 until August 2024)
DILARANG MENJUAL DAN MEMBERI KEPADA ORANG DI BAWAH 21 TAHUN DAN PEREMPUAN HAMIL (Do not sell and distribute to persons under 21 and pregnant women) (since August 2024)


== Iran ==
In Iran, a variety of warnings with graphic, disturbing images of tobacco-related harms (including lung cancer and mouth cancer) are placed prominently on cigarette packages. Additionally, many cigarette packs contain a message underneath each image: "ترک سیگار موجب سلامتی و افزایش طول عمرمیشود", literally "quitting cigarettes makes you healthier and increases your life expectancy".


== Japan ==

In 1972, Japan became the first country in Asia to display a general warning on cigarette packages.
Prior to 2005, there was only one warning on all Japanese cigarette packages.

健康のため吸いすぎに注意しましょう (For the good of your health, be careful not to smoke too much) (1972–1989)
あなたの健康を損なうおそれがありますので吸いすぎに注意しましょう (Be careful not to smoke too much, as there is a risk of damaging your health) (1990–2005)
Since 2005, more than one general warning is printed on cigarette packaging.
On the front of cigarette packages:

喫煙は、あなたにとって肺がんの原因の一つとなります。疫学的な推計によると、喫煙者は肺がんにより死亡する危険性が非喫煙者に比べて約2倍から4倍高くなります。 (Smoking is a cause of lung cancer. According to epidemiological estimates, smokers are about two to four times more likely than non-smokers to die of lung cancer.)
喫煙は、あなたにとって心筋梗塞の危険性を高めます。疫学的な推計によると、喫煙者は心筋梗塞により死亡する危険性が非喫煙者に比べて約1.7倍高くなります。 (Smoking increases risk of myocardial infarctions. According to epidemiological estimates, smokers are about 1.7 times more likely than non-smokers to die of a heart attack.)
喫煙は、あなたにとって脳卒中の危険性を高めます。疫学的な推計によると、喫煙者は脳卒中により死亡する危険性が非喫煙者に比べて約1.7倍高くなります。 (Smoking increases risk of strokes. According to epidemiological estimates, smokers are about 1.7 times more likely than non-smokers to die of a stroke.)
喫煙は、あなたにとって肺気腫を悪化させる危険性を高めます。 (Smoking can aggravate the symptoms of emphysema.)
On the back of cigarette packages:

妊娠中の喫煙は、胎児の発育障害や早産の原因の一つとなります。疫学的な推計によると、たばこを吸う妊婦は、吸わない妊婦に比べ、低出生体重の危険性が約2倍、早産の危険性が約3倍高くなります。（詳細については、厚生労働省のホーム・ページ www.mhlw.go.jp/topics/tobacco/main.html をご参照ください。） (Smoking during pregnancy is a cause of premature births and impaired fetal growth. According to epidemiological estimates, pregnant women who smoke have almost double the risk of low birth weight and three times the risk of premature births than pregnant women who do not smoke. (For more information, please visit the Ministry of Health home page at www.mhlw.go.jp/topics/tobacco/main.html.))
たばこの煙は、あなたの周りの人、特に乳幼児、子供、お年寄りなどの健康に悪影響を及ぼします。喫煙の際には、周りの人の迷惑にならないように注意しましょう。 (Tobacco smoke adversely affects the health of people around you, especially infants, children and the elderly. When smoking, be careful not to annoy others.)
人により程度は異なりますが、ニコチンにより喫煙への依存が生じます。 (The degree may differ from person to person, but nicotine [in cigarettes] causes addiction to smoking.)
未成年者の喫煙は、健康に対する悪影響やたばこへの依存をより強めます。周りの人から勧められても決して吸ってはいけません。 (Smoking while underage heightens the addiction and damage to health caused by cigarettes. Never smoke, even if encouraged to by those around you.)


== Laos ==

Laos introduced graphical warnings in 2016. Eight years later, these warnings were updated, one of which depicts a traditional Lao stupa grave accompanied by the message "Tobacco kills one in two smokers who don't quit".


== Malaysia ==
In Malaysia, a general warning was used between 1976 and 2009: AMARAN OLEH KERAJAAN MALAYSIA: MEROKOK MEMBAHAYAKAN KESIHATAN (Warning from the Government of Malaysia: Smoking endangers health).
Graphic images on cigarette packs were introduced in June 2009 to show the adverse long-term effects of excessive smoking, replacing the general warning with text describing said images printed in Malay (front) and English (back) explaining:

(in Malay) "Amaran: Rokok penyebab ..."
(in English) "Warning: Cigarettes cause ..."
Graphic warnings must cover 40% of the front of cigarette packages and 60% of the back. The branding of cigarettes as "light", "mild", etc. is also forbidden.


== Maldives ==
In the Maldives, products containing tobacco are required by law to have (in Dhivehi):
At the front and back:

A health warning eg. Smoking gives you a painful death (Dhivehi: ދުންފަތުން ލިބޭނީ ވޭންދެނިވި މަރެއް)
A cessation message eg. Stop quickly! (Dhivehi: އަވަހަށް ހުއްޓާލާ!)
A graphic image eg. cut open body showing lung cancer
Description of the image
On the sides:

Explanatory message of complications caused by tobacco eg. Tobacco contains 250 poisonous chemicals. These poisons damage vital organs of the body, causing cancer, stroke, lung damage, and other such painful illnesses. (Dhivehi: ދުންފަތުގައި 250 ވިހަ ކެމިކަލް ހިމެނެއެވެ. މި ވިހަތައް ހަށިގަނޑުގެ މުހިންމު ގުނަވަންތަކަށް ގެއްލުންދީ، ކެންސަރާއި، ސްޓްރޯކާއި، ފުއްޕާމޭ ހަލާކުވުން ފަދަ ވޭންދެނިވި ބަލިތައް ޖައްސައެވެ.)
A message Get help from a health professional to save yourself! (Dhivehi: ސަލާމަތް  ވުމަށް ޞިއްޙީ ފަންނު ވެރިއެއްގެ އެހީތެރިކަން ހޯދާ!)


== Mexico ==

Since 2010, cigarette packs in Mexico must contain health warnings and graphic images. By law, 30% of the pack's front, 100% of the pack's rear and 100% of one lateral must consist on images and warnings. The Secretariat of Health issues new warnings and images every six months. Images have included a dead rat, a partial mastectomy, a laryngectomy, a dead human fetus surrounded by cigarette butts, a woman being fed after suffering a stroke and damaged lungs, amongst others.
Warnings include smoking-related diseases and statistics, toxins found in cigarettes and others.
Mexico became the first country to put a warning on cigarette packs that tobacco use could increase the risk of COVID-19 infection.


== Moldova ==
General warning (on the front of cigarette packages, covering at least 30% of the area, Helvetica font):

"Fumatul ucide" (Smoking kills) or
"Fumatul dăunează grav sănătăţii dumneavoastră şi a celor din jur" (Smoking seriously harms you and those around);
Additional warnings (on the back of cigarette packages, covering at least 40% of the area, Helvetica font):

"Fumătorii mor mai tineri" (Smokers die younger);
"Fumatul blochează arterele şi provoacă infarct miocardic şi accident vascular cerebral" (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes);
"Fumatul conduce la moarte de cancer pulmonar" (Smoking causes death from lung cancer);
"Fumatul în timpul sarcinii dăunează copilului dumneavoastră" (Smoking while pregnant harms your baby);
"Protejaţi copiii dumneavoastră de inspirarea fumului de ţigaretă" (Protect your children from breathing in the cigarette smoke);
"Psihologul, profesorul sau medicul vă poate ajuta să renunţaţi la fumat" (Psychologists, professors and doctors can help you quit smoking);
"Fumatul creează dependenţă rapidă, nu încercaţi să fumaţi" (Smoking becomes addictive fast, try not to smoke);
"Abandonarea fumatului reduce riscul de îmbolnăviri cardiace sau pulmonare fatale" (Quitting smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases);
"Fumatul poate provoca o moarte lentă şi dureroasă" (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death);
"Fumatul reduce circulaţia sîngelui şi provoacă impotenţă" (Smoking reduces blood circulation and increases impotency);
"Fumatul provoacă îmbolnăvirea tenului (pielei)" (Smoking causes skin diseases);
"Fumatul creează grave disfuncţii sexuale" (Smoking causes serious sexual dysfunction);
Regulated by "Lege cu privire la tutun şi la articolele din tutun" (Law on tobacco and tobacco articles) nr. 278-XVI from 14.12.2007 enabled at 07.03.2008
There is no such rule in Transnistria, where cigarette packages have variable warning labels depending on where they come from.


== New Zealand ==

The first health warnings appeared on cigarette packets in New Zealand in 1974. Warning images accompanying text have been required to appear on each packet since 28 February 2008. New regulations were made on 14 March 2018 which provided for larger warnings and a new schedule of images and messages.
By law, 75% of a pack's front and 100% of its rear must consist of warning messages. Images include gangrenous toes, rotting teeth and gums, diseased lungs and smoking-damaged hearts. Cigarette packets also carry the New Zealand Quitline logo and phone number and other information about quitting smoking.
In total, there are 15 different warnings. A full list with pictures is available at the New Zealand Ministry of Health's website. Warning messages are rotated annually. The following is a list of the warnings in English and Māori.

Smoking causes heart attacks, KA PĀ MAI NGĀ MANAWA-HĒ I TE KAI PAIPA
Smoking causes over 80% of lung cancers, NEKE ATU I TE 80% O NGĀ MATE PUKUPUKU KI NGĀ PŪKAHUKAHU I AHU MAI I TE KAI PAIPA
Smoking harms your baby before it is born, KA TŪKINOHIA TŌ PĒPI I TO KŌPŪ I TE KAI PAIPA
Your smoking harms others, KA TŪKINOHIA ĒTAHI ATU I Ō MAHI KAI PAIPA
Smoking is a major cause of stroke, KA PIKI AKE I TE KAI PAIPA TŌ TŪPONO KI TE IKURA RORO
Smoking damages your blood vessels, KA TŪKINOHIA Ō IA TOTO I TE KAI PAIPA
Smoking is not attractive, KA ANUANU KOE I TE KAI PAIPA
Smoking causes lung cancer, KA PĀ MAI TE MATE PUKUPUKU KI NGĀ PŪKAHUKAHU I TE KAI PAIPA
Smoking when pregnant harms your baby, KA TŪKINOHIA TŌ PĒPI I TE KAI PAIPA I A KOE E HAPŪ ANA
Your smoking harms children, KA TŪKINOHIA NGĀ TAMARIKI I Ō MAHI KAI PAIPA
Quit before it is too late, ME WHAKAMUTU KEI RIRO KOE
Smoking causes gum disease and stinking breath, KA PĀ TE MATE PŪNIHO, KA HAUNGA TŌ HĀ I TE KAI PAIPA


== Nigeria ==
Six warnings existed prior to 2013:

Smoking is addictive
Smoking damages lungs
Smoking can kill
Smoking can cause cancer
Smoking can damage the fetus
From 2013 onwards, the general warning in Nigeria is: The Federal Ministry of Health warns that smokers are liable to die young.


== North Korea ==
North Korea signed the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control on 17 June 2003 and ratified it on 27 April 2005. Warnings are required on all types of packaging, but their appearance is not regulated in any way. They usually state that smoking is harmful to health. However, nicotine and tar content listed must not be misleading and do need to be approved by local authorities. Graphic warning images that are now common worldwide have never appeared on packaging in North Korea.


== Norway ==

Norway has had general warnings on cigarette packets since 1975. Norway's warnings of today were introduced in 2003 and are in line with the European Union's legislation, as Norway is an EEA member:
On the front of cigarette and cigar packages, covering about 30% of the area:

Røyking dreper (Smoking kills)
Røyking er svært skadelig for deg og dine omgivelser (Smoking is very harmful to you and your surroundings)
On the back of cigarette and cigar packages, covering about 45% of the area:

Røyking fører til dødeleg lungekreft (Smoking causes fatal lung cancer)
Hvis du slutter å røyke vil du minske risikoen for dødelige hjerte- og lungesykdommer (If you stop smoking, you will reduce the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
Røyking fører til tidleg aldring av huda (Smoking causes early ageing of the skin)
Røyking kan redusere blodgjennomstrømminga og føre til impotens (Smoking may reduce the blood flow and cause impotence)
Røyking kan føre til ein langsam og smertefull død (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death)
Røyking kan redusere sædkvaliteten og minske fruktbarheten (Smoking can reduce sperm quality and decrease fertility)
Vern barn mot tobakksrøyk, ikke la dem puste inn din røyk (Protect children against smoke, don't let them inhale your smoke)
Røyking er sterkt avhengighetsskapende: Ikke begynn å røyke (Smoking is highly addictive: Don't start smoking)
Røyking fører til forkalking av årene og forårsakar hjarteinfarkt og slag (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes)
Din lege eller ditt apotek kan hjelpe deg med røykeslutt (Your doctor or your pharmacy can help you stop smoking)
Få hjelp til røykeslutt – ring Røyketelefonen 800 400 85 (Get help to stop smoking – call the Quitline: 800 400 85)
Røyking nedsetter levealderen (Smoking lowers life expectancy)
Røyking under graviditeten skader barnet (Smoking during pregnancy harms the child)
Røyk inneholder benzen, nitrosaminer, formaldehyd og blåsyre (Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide)
Tobacco products like snus and chewing tobacco have the following warning printed on them:

Denne tobakksvaren kan være helseskadelig og er avhengighetsskapende (This tobacco product may be a health hazard and is addictive)


== Pakistan ==
All cigarette packages in Pakistan are required by Statutory Order 1219(I)/2008 dated 25 September 2008, published in The Gazette of Pakistan dated 24 November 2008, to carry rotating health warnings from 1 July 2009.
Each health warning is printed for a period of 6 months, covering at least 30% on both sides of the packet and must be printed in Urdu at the front and English at the back. The warnings in English currently in use are:

Protect children, don't let them breathe your smoke – Ministry of Health
Smoking causes mouth and throat cancer – Ministry of Health
Quit smoking and live a longer life – Ministry of Health
Smoking severely harms you and the people around you – Ministry of Health


== Paraguay ==
The Paraguay Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare requires cigarette packages to have graphic images and text warnings in both Spanish and Guaraní covering at least 40% of both main faces. Additionally, 100% of one of the sides must have detailed information as to the content of the cigarettes.


== Philippines ==

All cigarette packaging sold in the Philippines are required to display a government warning label. The warnings include:

Government Warning: Cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health.
Government Warning: Cigarettes are addictive.
Government Warning: Tobacco smoke can harm your children.
Government Warning: Smoking kills.
In July 2014, President Benigno Aquino III signed the Republic Act 10643, or "An Act to Effectively Instill Health Consciousness through Graphic Health Warnings on Tobacco Products", more known as the "Graphic Health Warning Act." This law requires tobacco product packaging to display pictures of the ill effects of smoking, occupying the bottom half of the display area in both front and the back side of the packaging. On 3 March 2016, Department of Health (DOH) secretary Janette Garin started the implementation of Republic Act 10643, requiring tobacco manufacturers to include graphic health warnings on newer cigarette packaging.
With the Graphic Health Warning Act implemented, graphic health warnings are used on all newer cigarette packages and older packages using text-only warnings are required to be replaced by newer ones incorporating graphic warnings. The 12 new warnings, showing photos of negative effects of smoking, like mouth cancer, impotence and gangrene are rotated every two years, and on 3 November 2016, all cigarette packaging without graphic health warning messages are banned from sale. Labeling of cigarettes with "light" or "mild" is also forbidden by the Graphic Health Warning Act.


== Russia ==
In Russia, warning messages have existed since the late 1970s, when the Soviet Union stipulated that the message "The USSR Ministry of Health warns: Smoking is dangerous to your health" be printed in Russian on the front (as Минздрав СССР предупреждает: КУРЕНИЕ ОПАСНО ДЛЯ ВАШЕГО ЗДОРОВЬЯ) and the language of each respective republic on the back of cigarette packages.

The warnings were revised in 2013 with pictorial depictions of tobacco-related harms, falling in line with European Union standards.

12 different variants are used.


== Serbia ==

The warning messages cigarette packets in Serbia are visually similar to what is used in European Union countries, but the texts used in Serbia are not translated from EU-approved texts.


== Singapore ==
In 1987, Singapore began displaying blunt, straight-to-the-point text warnings like "Smoking damages your lungs" and "Smoking causes heart disease" on cigarette packets. They were replaced by graphic warnings in August 2004 bearing the following messages:

Smoking causes a slow and painful death
Smoking harms your family
Tobacco smoke can kill babies
Smoking causes strokes
Smoking causes lung cancer
Smoking causes mouth diseases
Smoking causes 92% of oral cancers
These warnings were later copied by Brunei.
In 2016, the warnings were revised, with images focusing mostly on damaged organs. The following warnings show what is printed nowadays.

Smoking causes mouth diseases
Smoking can cause a slow and painful death
Smoking causes lung cancer
Smoking causes gangrene
Smoking causes neck cancer
Smoking harms your family
From 1 January 2009, people possessing cigarettes without the SDPC (Singapore Duty Paid Cigarettes) label will be committing an offence under the Customs and GST Acts. The law was passed to distinguish non-duty paid, contraband cigarettes from duty-paid ones.


== Somalia ==
A small warning in Somali and English is printed on Somali cigarette packages.


== South Africa ==
In South Africa, the Tobacco Products Control Act, 1993 and its amendments (1999, 2007, 2009), stipulate that a warning related to the harmful effects (health, social, or economic) of tobacco smoking, or the beneficial effects of cessation, must be placed prominently on tobacco products covering 15% of the obverse, 25% of the reverse and 20% of the sides of packs.
According to the draft Control of Tobacco Products and Electronic Delivery Systems Bill, 2018, new legislation, once enacted, will require uniform, plain-colored packaging (branding and logos prohibited) containing the brand and product name in a standard typeface and color, a warning related to the harmful effects of tobacco smoking, or beneficial effects of cessation, and a graphic image of tobacco-related harm.


== South Korea ==

In South Korea, general warnings on cigarette packaging have been used since 1976. The warning messages used since then have been:

From 1976 to November 1989: 건강을 위하여 지나친 흡연을 삼갑시다 (For your health, please refrain from smoking too much)
From December 1989 to 1996: 흡연은 폐암 등을 일으킬 수 있으며, 특히 임산부와 청소년의 건강에 해롭습니다 (Smoking may cause lung cancer and it is especially dangerous for teenagers and pregnant women)
From 1996 to March 2005:
Front: 흡연은 폐암 등 각종 질병의 원인이 되며, 특히 임신부와 청소년의 건강에 해롭습니다 (Smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases and it is especially dangerous for teenagers and pregnant women)
Back: 19세 미만 청소년에게 판매할 수 없습니다 (It is illegal to sell cigarettes to people under 19) and additionally, 금연하면 건강해지고 장수할 수 있습니다 (You can be healthy and live longer if you quit), 흡연은 중풍과 심장병도 일으킵니다 (Smoking also causes paralysis and heart diseases), 흡연은 사랑하는 자녀의 건강도 해칩니다 (Smoking also damages your beloved children), 당신이 흡연하면 다른 사람의 건강도 해칩니다 (Smoking damages others)

From April 2005 to April 2007:
Front: 건강을 해치는 담배 그래도 피우시겠습니까? (Smoking damages your health. Do you still want to smoke?)
Back: 19세 미만 청소년에게 판매할 수 없습니다 (It is illegal to sell cigarettes to people under 19) and additionally, 금연하면 건강해지고 장수할 수 있습니다 (You can be healthy and live longer if you quit), 흡연은 중풍과 심장병도 일으킵니다 (Smoking also causes paralysis and heart diseases), 흡연은 사랑하는 자녀의 건강도 해칩니다 (Smoking also damages your beloved children), 당신이 흡연하면 다른 사람의 건강도 해칩니다 (Smoking hurts others)

From April 2007 to April 2009
Front, 흡연은 폐암 등 각종 질병의 원인이 되며, 특히 임신부와 청소년의 건강에 해롭습니다 (Smoking causes lung cancer and other diseases and it is especially dangerous for teenagers and pregnant women)
Back: 19세 미만 청소년에게 판매 금지! 당신 자녀의 건강을 해칩니다" (It is illegal to sell cigarettes to people under 19! It hurts your children's health)

From April 2009 to April 2011 (a prospectus)
Front: 건강에 해로운 담배, 일단 흡연하게 되면 끊기가 매우 어렵습니다 (Smoking damages your health. Once you start smoking, it is very difficult to quit)
Back: 19세 미만 청소년에게 판매 금지! 당신 자녀의 건강을 해칩니다 (It is illegal to sell cigarettes to people under 19! It hurts your children's health)

From December 2016, 50% of cigarette packages must contain warning elements, of which 30% must be graphic warnings. In addition to the existing warning: 흡연이 질병의 원인이 될 수 있습니다. (Smoking can be a cause of disease), the following warning will be mandatory: 흡연은 다른 사람의 건강을 위협할 수 있습니다. (Smoking can harm others' health)
From 2017, more pictorial warnings were added to cigarette packs.


== Sri Lanka ==
Sri Lanka introduced graphic health warnings on cigarette packages in 2015. The warnings, displayed in English, Sinhalese and Tamil, cover 60% of both front and back panels.


== Switzerland ==

Switzerland has warning messages in its three official languages (German, French and Italian). The three warning messages below, all meaning "Smoking kills", are posted on cigarette packs until 2024:

(in German) Rauchen ist tödlich.
(in French) Fumer tue.
(in Italian) Il fumo uccide.
Since October 2024, the Federal Act on Tobacco Products updated the warnings to "Smoking kills – stop now":

(in German) Rauchen ist tödlich – hören Sie jetzt auf.
(in French) Fumer tue – arrêtez maintenant.
(in Italian) Il fumo uccide – smetti subito.


== Taiwan ==
The warnings in Taiwan are led by the phrase "行政院衛生署警告" (Warning from the Department of Health, Executive Yuan:) and followed by one of the following warnings:

吸菸有害健康: Smoking is hazardous to your health
孕婦吸菸易導致胎兒早產及體重不足: Smoking during pregnancy can cause premature death and underweight birth
抽菸會導致肺癌﹑心臟病﹑氣腫及與懷孕有關的問題: Smoking can cause lung cancer, heart diseases, emphysema and pregnancy-related problems
吸菸害人害己: Smoking hurts yourself and others
懷孕婦女吸菸可能傷害胎兒，導致早產及體重不足: Smoking during pregnancy might damage the fetus and can cause premature death and underweight birth
戒菸可減少健康的危害: Quitting smoking can reduce health risks (no longer used)
The images and warnings were revised in 2014, after the Department of Health was reorganised into the Ministry of Health and Welfare. The following warnings show what is printed since 1 June 2014.

吸菸導致皮膚老化: Smoking causes ageing of the skin
菸癮困你一生: Tobacco addiction traps your life
吸菸會導致性功能障礙: Smoking causes sexual dysfunctions
菸害導致胎兒異常及早產: Smoking causes birth defects and premature birth
不吸菸，你可以擁有更多: You can have more if you quit smoking
二手菸引發兒童肺炎、中耳炎、癌症: Second hand smoking causes pneumonia, otitis media and cancer in children
吸菸影響口腔衛生: Smoking affects oral hygiene
吸菸引發自己與家人中風與心臟病: Smoking makes you and your family suffer strokes and heart diseases
Warnings of any version are accompanied with "戒煙專線: 0800-636363" (Smoking Quitline: 0800–636363).


== Thailand ==

Graphic warnings have appeared on Thai cigarette packages since 25 March 2005 and underwent updates in 2006, 2009, 2010, 2014 and 2022. A recent study showed that the warnings made Thai smokers think more often about the health risks of smoking and about quitting smoking.
Thailand introduced plain packaging in 2020.


== Turkey ==

Front of packaging (covers 65% of surface)

or

Back of packaging (covers 40% of surface)
Sigara içenler genç yaşta ölür. (Smokers die younger)
Sigara içmek damarları tıkar, kalp krizine ve felçlere neden olur. (Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and paralysis.)
Sigara içmek ölümcül akciğer kanserine neden olur. (Smoking causes lethal lung cancer)
Hamile iken sigara içmek bebeğe zarar verir. (Smoking while pregnant will harm the baby)
Çocukları koruyun: Dumanınızı onlara solutmayın. (Protect your children, don't let them breathe your smoke.)
Sağlık kuruluşları sigarayı bırakmada size yardımcı olabilir. (Health agencies can help you quit smoking)
Sigara içmek yüksek derecede bağımlılık yapar, başlamayın. (Smoking is highly addictive, don't start)
Sigarayı bırakmak ölümcül kalp ve akciğer hastalıkları riskini azaltır. (Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases)
Sigara içmek ağrılı ve yavaş bir ölüme neden olabilir. (Smoking can cause a slow and painful death)
Sigarayı bırakmak için doktorunuzdan ve ... den yardım isteyin. (To quit smoking ask for help from your doctor and ...)
Sigara içmek kan akışını yavaşlatır ve cinsel iktidarsızlığa neden olur. (Smoking will slow the blood flow and cause impotence)
Sigara içmek cildin erken yaşlanmasına neden olur. (Smoking causes early ageing of the skin)
Sigara içmek spermlere zarar vererek doğurganlığı azaltır. (Smoking can damage the sperm and decreases fertility)
Sigara dumanında benzen, nitrozamin, formaldehit ve hidrojensiyanit gibi kanser yapıcı maddeler bulunur. (Cigarette smoke contains carcinogens such as benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide.)


== Ukraine ==
The warning messages on cigarette packets in Ukraine are also visually similar to those in European Union countries:


== United Kingdom ==

In 1971, tobacco companies printed on the left side of cigarette packets an official warning: "Warning by H.M. Government – Smoking can harm your health", followed by the phrase "Health Department's Chief Medical Officers", issuers of the warning.
In 1991, the EU tightened laws on tobacco warnings. Thus, the message "Tobacco seriously damages health" was printed on the front of all tobacco packs. An additional warning was also printed on the reverse of cigarette packs.
In 2003, new EU regulations required one of the following general warnings must be displayed, covering at least 30% of the surface of the pack:

Smoking kills (- quit now)
Smoking seriously harms you and others around you
Additionally, one of the following additional warnings must be displayed, covering at least 40% of the surface of the pack:

Smokers die younger
Smoking clogs the arteries and causes heart attacks and strokes
Smoking causes fatal lung cancer
Smoking when pregnant harms your baby
Protect children: don't make them breathe your smoke
Your doctor or your pharmacist can help you stop smoking
Smoking is highly addictive, don't start
Stopping smoking reduces the risk of fatal heart and lung diseases
Smoking can cause a slow and painful death
Get help to stop smoking: [telephone]/[postal address]/[internet address]/consult your doctor/pharmacist
Smoking may reduce the blood flow and cause impotence
Smoking causes ageing of the skin
Smoking can damage the sperm and decreases fertility
Smoke contains benzene, nitrosamines, formaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide
From October 2008, all cigarette products manufactured must carry picture warnings in the reverse. Every pack must have one of these warnings by October 2009.
Plain packaging, including prominent and standardised health warnings and minimal manufacturer information, became compulsory for all cigarette and hand-rolling tobacco packs manufactured after May 2016 and sold after May 2017.


== United States ==

In 1966, the United States became the first nation in the world to require a health warning on cigarette packages.
In 1973, the assistant director of Research at R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company wrote an internal memorandum regarding new brands of cigarettes for the youth market. He observed that, "psychologically, at eighteen, one is immortal" and theorized that "the desire to be daring is part of the motivation to start smoking." He stated, "in this sense the label on the package is a plus."
In 1999, Philip Morris USA purchased three brands of cigarettes from Liggett Group Inc. The brands were: Chesterfield, L&M, and Lark. At the time Philip Morris purchased the brands from Liggett, the packaging for those cigarettes included the statement "Smoking is Addictive". After Philip Morris acquired the three Liggett brands, it removed the statement from the packages.
Though the United States started the trend of labeling cigarette packages with warnings, today the country has one of the least restrictive labelling requirements on their packages. Warnings are usually in small typeface placed along one of the sides of the cigarette packs with colors and fonts that closely resemble the rest of the package, so the warnings essentially are integrated and do not stand out with the rest of the cigarette package.
However, this is subject to change as the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act of 2009 requires color graphics with supplemental text that depicts the negative consequences of smoking to cover 50% of the front and rear of each pack. The nine new graphic warning labels were announced by the FDA in June 2011 and were required to appear on packaging by September 2012, though this was delayed by legal challenges.
In August 2011, five tobacco companies filed a lawsuit against the FDA in an effort to reverse the new warning mandate. Tobacco companies claimed that being required to promote government anti-smoking campaigns by placing the new warnings on packaging violates the companies' free speech rights. Additionally, R.J. Reynolds, Lorillard, Commonwealth Brands Inc., Liggett Group LLC and Santa Fe Natural Tobacco Company Inc. claimed that the graphic labels are an unconstitutional way of forcing tobacco companies to engage in anti-smoking advocacy on the government's behalf. A First Amendment lawyer, Floyd Abrams, represented the tobacco companies in the case, contending that requiring graphic warning labels on a lawful product cannot withstand constitutional scrutiny. The Association of National Advertisers and the American Advertising Federation also filed a brief in the suit, arguing that the labels infringe on commercial free speech and could lead to further government intrusion if left unchallenged.
On 29 February 2012, US District Judge Richard Leon ruled that the labels violate the right to free speech in the First Amendment. However, the following month the US Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit upheld the majority of the Tobacco Control Act of 2009, including the part requiring graphic warning labels. In April 2013 the Supreme Court declined to hear the appeal to this ruling, allowing the new labels to stand. As the original ruling against the FDA images was not actually reversed, the FDA will again need to go through the process of developing the new warning labels, and the timetable and final product remain unknown. Additionally, rulings of the 6th Circuit are precedential only in the states comprising the 6th Circuit, i.e., Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee.
In March 2020, the FDA approved a set of 11 new graphic warning labels with images for cigarette packaging, with a deadline of compliance being set to June 18, 2021. The mandate would have required packaging to cover the top 50% of the front and rear panels of packages, as well as at least 20% of the top. Tobacco manufacturers R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., Philip Morris USA, ITG Brands LLC and Liggett Group LLC filed a joint motion requesting a preliminary injunction on implementing the labels and a ruling to prohibit enforcement in April 2020. They argued that the new packaging would have been a violation of the First Amendment. In December 2022, U.S. district judge J. Campbell Barker of the Eastern District of Texas ordered the new guidelines to be vacated, arguing the multiple interpretation of images cannot prove neutrality. The deadline was pushed to November 6, 2023. The decision was later appealed and overturned by a U.S. Appeals court who ruled unanimously that the warnings were "factual and uncontroversial" and thus was not in violation of the First Amendment. The decision was later appealed again to the U.S. Supreme Court. However, the Court declined to hear the case, thus making the new packaging legal. In September 2024, the FDA announced that enforcement of the new packaging would begin on December 12, 2025.


=== Cigars ===
SURGEON GENERAL WARNING: Cigar Smoking Can Cause Cancers of the Mouth And Throat, Even If You Do Not Inhale.
SURGEON GENERAL WARNING: Cigars Are Not A Safe Alternative To Cigarettes.
SURGEON GENERAL WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Increases The Risk of Lung Cancer And Heart Disease, Even in Nonsmokers.
SURGEON GENERAL WARNING: Cigar Smoking Can Cause Lung Cancer And Heart Disease.
SURGEON GENERAL WARNING: Tobacco Use Increases The Risk of Infertility, Stillbirth, And Low Birth Weight.
SURGEON GENERAL WARNING: This Product Contains/Produces Chemicals Known to the State of California To Cause Cancer, And Birth Defects Or Other Reproductive Harm.
Stronger warning labels started to appear in May 2010, but are yet to be officially implemented.


=== Smokeless tobacco ===

Effective June 2010, the following labels began to appear on smokeless tobacco products (most of which are chewing tobacco) and their advertisements.

Warning: This product can cause mouth cancer.
Warning: This product can cause gum disease and tooth loss.
Warning: This product is not a safe alternative to cigarettes.
Warning: Smokeless tobacco is addictive.
These warnings are required to comprise 30% of two principal display panels on the packaging; on advertisements, the health warnings must constitute 20% of the total area.


== Venezuela ==
In 1978, Venezuela began printing a warning in small type along one of the sides of cigarette packs: "Advertencia: 'Se ha determinado que el fumar cigarrillos es nocivo para la salud' – Ley de Impuesto sobre Cigarrillos" (Warning: "It has been determined that cigarette smoking is harmful to health" (in brackets) – Cigarette Tax Law).
On 24 March 2005, as part of the "Venezuela 100% libre de humo" (100% smoke-free Venezuela) campaign initiated by Hugo Chávez, another warning similar to that of Brazil was introduced: "Este producto contiene alquitrán, nicotina y monóxido de carbono, los cuales son cancerígenos y tóxicos. No existen niveles seguros para el consumo de estas sustancias" ("This product contains tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide, which are carcinogenic and toxic. There are no safe levels for consumption of these substances"). The 1978 warning was not removed, so cigarette packs contains both warnings, one on each side, since then. In addition, one of the following warnings with images is randomly printed, occupying 100% of the back of the pack (40% for the text warning and 60% for the image):

Este producto es dañino para la salud y produce adicción (This product is hazardous to your health and is addictive)
Fumar causa mal aliento, pérdida de muelas y cáncer de boca (Smoking causes bad breath, tooth decay and mouth cancer)
Fumar causa cáncer de pulmón, tos, enfisema pulmonar y bronquitis crónica (Smoking causes lung cancer, coughing, pulmonar emphysema and chronic bronchitis). The picture accompanying this warning is a comparison between a smoker's lung on the left and a healthy lung on the right.
Fumar causa infarto al corazón. Q.E.P.D. al portador, muerto por fumador (Smoking causes cardiac infarction. R.I.P. bearer, killed by smoking)
Fumar durante el embarazo daña la salud de tu bebé (Smoking while pregnant harms your baby's health)
Los niños y niñas comienzan a fumar al ver adultos fumando (Children start smoking when they see adults smoke)
Fumar cigarrillos causa cáncer de laringe (Smoking cigarettes causes laryngeal cancer)
Fumar causa impotencia en los hombres (Smoking causes impotence in men)
El humo del cigarrillo afecta también a quien no fuma (Cigarette smoke also harms those who don't smoke)
Da hoy el primer paso, dejar de fumar es posible (Take your first step today, quitting smoking is possible)
Curiously, these warnings only appear on cigarette packs and not on other tobacco products, which use the 1978 warning.


== Vietnam ==
The following warnings have appeared on Vietnamese cigarette packages since 2013, along with graphic, disturbing images of tobacco-related harms:

Hút thuốc dẫn đến cái chết từ từ và đau đớn (Smoking leads to a slow and painful death)
Khói thuốc lá rất có hại cho thai nhi và trẻ nhỏ (Cigarette smoke is harmful to infants and young children)
Hút thuốc gây bệnh tim mạch (Smoking causes heart diseases)
Hút thuốc gây ung thư họng và thanh quản (Smoking causes throat and laryngeal cancer)
Hút thuốc gây hôi miệng và hỏng răng (Smoking causes halitosis and damages teeth)
Hút thuốc gây ung thư phổi (Smoking causes lung cancer)


== References ==


== External links ==

Tobacco Labelling Resource Centre
Warning: Graphic Cigarette Labels — slideshow by Life magazine
BBC News Online: "Spoof cigarette warnings slammed"
Directive 2001/37/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2001
UCSF Tobacco Industry Videos Collection
Quit Now, website advertised on Australian packets of cigarettes
Cigarette Package Health Warnings International Status Report – Fourth Edition